Section 1 - Introduction Page 1-1 
Version: July 2017 
Section 1  
INTRODUCTION 
This Section Covers 
 Commercial Driver License Tests
 Medical Requirements
 Driver Disqualifications
 Other Safety Rules
 International Registration Program
There is a federal requirement that each state have 
minimum standards for the licensing of commercial 
drivers.  
This manual provides driver license testing 
information for drivers who wish to have a 
commercial driver license (CDL). This manual does 
NOT provide information on all the federal and state 
requirements needed before you can drive a 
commercial motor vehicle (CMV). You may have to 
contact your state driver licensing authority for 
additional information. 
You must have a CDL to operate: 
Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight 
rating (GVWR) of 26,001 pounds or more. 
A combination vehicle with a gross combination 
weight rating (GCWR) of 26,001 or more pounds, 
provided the GVWR of the vehicle(s) being towed is 
in excess of 10,000 pounds. 
A vehicle designed to transport 16 or more 
passengers (including the driver). 
Any size vehicle which requires hazardous material 
placards or is carrying material listed as a select 
agent or toxin in 42 CFR part 73. Federal 
regulations through the Department of Homeland 
Security require a background check and 
fingerprinting for the Hazardous Materials 
endorsement. Contact your local department of 
driver licensing for more information.    
(Your state may have additional definitions of 
CMVs.) 
CDL Classifications 
The CDL vehicle classification included in the 
federal standard, together with the type of cargo to 
be transported, determine what type of CDL license 
and endorsement an applicant must apply for. 
There are three basic vehicle classes or groups: 
Class A   Combination Vehicles. Any combination 
of vehicles with gross combination weight rating 
(GCWR) of 26,001 or more pounds falls in Group A 
provided the GVWR of the vehicle(s) being towed is 
more than 10,000 pounds. Most Class A vehicles 
are trucks such as truck-tractor/semi-trailer or truck 
and trailer combinations. However, tractor-trailer 
buses may be found in a few communities. Driving a 
Class A vehicle requires considerably more skill and 
knowledge than driving vehicles in Classes B and C. 
Since these skills include those required to drive a B 
and C vehicle, a driver who has a Class A license 
also may drive vehicles in Classes B and C. 
Class B   Heavy Straight Vehicles. Any single 
vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 or more pounds falls 
in Group B, or any such vehicle towing another 
vehicle not in excess of 10,000 pounds GVWR. 
Class B includes straight trucks and large buses, 
including articulated buses. Safely driving these 
heavy vehicles requires considerably more 
knowledge and skill than driving the small trucks and 
buses found in Class C. Since they include the skills 
required to drive Class C vehicles, drivers who have 
qualified for a Class B license may also drive vehicles 
in Class C. 
Class C   Small Vehicles. Any single vehicle with a 
GVWR less than 26,001 pounds falls in Group C, or 
any such vehicle towing another vehicle not in 
excess of 10,000 pounds GVWR. However, vehicles 
of this size are included in the CDL program only if 
they are: 1) Designed to carry 16 or more passengers 
including the driver, or (2) Used to transport 
hazardous materials in quantities requiring 
placarding under the Hazardous Materials 
Regulations (49 CFR Part 172, Subpart F) or is 
carrying material listed as a select agent or toxin in 
42 CFR part 73. 
There are a great variety of vehicles in Class C . 
Some rather large Class C vehicles may require 
more skill and knowledge to operate than do the 
smaller ones. However, the licensing category is 
based principally on the type of cargo carried. 
Because of the seriousness of an accident involving 
hazardous material or human passengers, the safe 
operation of even the smaller vehicles in Class C 
requires special knowledge and the drivers of these 
vehicles must have a CDL. 
STATE OPTIONS: Some states may include more 
drivers and vehicles in their CDL programs. For 
example, in some states, a CDL may be required for 
buses designed to carry fewer than 16 passengers. 
Going beyond the federal standard is acceptable 
and the state will need to decide which battery of 
tests applies to these drivers, or develop a new 
battery. 
--- PAGE 18 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System    
Section 1 - Introduction Page 1-2  
Version: July 2017 
CDL Endorsements & Restrictions 
Endorsements 
All commercial drivers who drive certain types of 
vehicles or haul certain types of cargo must add 
endorsements to their CDL license  and/or 
Commercial Learner’s Permit (CLP) to show that 
they have the spec ialized knowledge required for 
these operations. There are six kinds of CDL 
endorsements that may be required, depending on 
the vehicle or type of cargo.   
NOTE:  The only endorsements that may be 
added to a Commercial Learner’s Permit (CLP) 
are: 
- Passenger (P); 
- School bus (S); and 
- Tank vehicle (N). 
Double and Triple Trailers (T) . Many drivers who 
are qualified to drive Class A vehicles may wish to 
pull double or triple trailers. Research shows that 
considerable additional knowledge and skill is 
necessary to safely pull double and triple trailers in 
various traffic conditions and driving environments. 
Consequently, adding the endorsement to the 
licenses of Class A drivers is necessary if they wish 
to pull double or triple trailers. A special knowledge 
examination on the problems associated with pulling 
multiple trailers must be passed. 
Tank Vehicle (N).  Drivers of any commercial motor 
vehicle that is designed to transport any liquid or 
gaseous materials within a tank or tanks having an 
individual rated capaci ty of more than 119 gallons 
and an aggregate rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or 
more that is either permanently or temporarily 
attached to the vehicle or the chassis must obtain this 
endorsement.  Applies to Class A, B and C (only 
applicable to Class C if the vehicle is hauling 
hazardous materials) vehicles. Liquids in bulk cause 
driving control problems because the cargo is heavy, 
prone to shifting, and has a high center of gravity. 
These drivers must pass a special knowledge 
examination on the problems posed by large volume 
liquid cargos to add the endorsement to their 
CDL/CLP. 
Passengers (P). Drivers who wish to drive a vehicle 
having a design capacity to carry 16 or more people, 
including the driver, must add a passenger 
endorsement to their CDL/CLP. The y must pass a 
special knowledge examination on safety 
considerations when transporting passengers and 
must pass skills tests in a passenger vehicle. The 
endorsement applies to applicants who wish to drive 
a bus in any class (A, B, or C). 
   
Hazardous Materials (H). Any driver, regardless of 
the vehicle Class/Group (A, B, or C) who wishes to 
haul any material that has been designated as 
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to 
be placarded under subpart F of 49 CFR part 172; or 
any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or 
toxin 42 CFR Part 73 must add a hazardous 
materials endorsement to their CDL. S/he must pass 
a special written examination on how to recognize, 
handle, and transport hazardous materials. 
The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) 
and the US Department of Transportation require 
background checks on commercial drivers who are 
certified to transport hazardous materials.  The 
background checks include a review of criminal, 
immigration and FBI records.  If the driver is found 
to represent a security threat, TSA will notify the 
person and the state will deny issuance of an 
endorsement. 
Combination Hazardous Materials and Tank 
Vehicle (X) . Drivers of tank vehicles who haul 
hazardous materials or waste in amounts requiring 
placards must add an X endorsement to their CDL, 
showing that they have passed the special 
knowledge examinations for both tank vehicles and 
hazardous materials. 
School Buses (S) . Drivers who wish to drive a 
school bus, must add a school bus endorsement to 
their CDL/CLP. They must pass a special knowledge 
examination on safety considerations when 
transporting passengers in a school bus and must 
pass skills tests in a school bus. The endorsement 
applies to applicants who wish to drive a school bus 
in any class (A, B, or C). 
In addition to these six required endorsements, 
states may add special endorsements of their 
own as they see fit. 
 
Restrictions 
Restrictions may be added to Commercial Driver 
Licenses/Permits based upon the type of vehicle and 
equipment that the driver uses for the Skills Test. 
There are ten standardized restriction codes. 
NOTE:  If a CLP is issued with a Passenger (P) or a 
School Bus (S) endorsement, it must also contain a 
(P) – No passengers in a CMV bus restriction.   
If a CLP is issued with a Tanker (N) endorsement, it 
must also contain a (X) – No cargo in a CMV tank 
vehicle.  
--- PAGE 19 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System  
Section 1 - Introduction Page 1-3 
Version: July 2017 
(E) - No manual transmission. If an applicant 
performs the skills test in a vehicle equipped with an 
automatic transmission, the State must indicate on 
the CDL, if issued, that the person is restricted from 
operating a CMV equipped with a manual 
transmission.  For the purposes of the skills test and 
the restriction, an automatic transmission includes 
any transmission not operating fully on the gear shift 
and clutch principle. 
(K) - Intrastate only:    If an applicant certifies their 
status as either Non-Excepted Intrastate or 
Excepted Intrastate, the state must indicate on the 
CDL, if issued, that person is restricted from 
operating  a CMV in interstate commerce.  States 
may impose this restriction for reasons other than 
those specified above. 
(L) - No Air brake equipped CMV:   If an applicant 
does not take or fails the air brake component of the 
knowledge test, or performs the skills test in a 
vehicle not equipped with air brakes, the State must 
indicate on the CLP or CDL, if issued, that the 
person is restricted from operating a CMV equipped 
with any type of air brakes.  For the purposes of the 
skills test and the restriction, air brakes include any 
braking system operating fully or partially on the air 
brake principle. 
(M) - No Class A passenger vehicle:   If an 
applicant applying for a passenger endorsement 
performs the skills test in a passenger vehicle 
requiring a Group B CDL, the State must indicate on 
the CDL, if issued, that the person is restricted from 
operating a passenger vehicle requiring a Group A 
CDL. 
(N) - No Class A and B passenger vehicle:   If an 
applicant applying for a passenger endorsement 
performs the skills test in a passenger vehicle 
requiring a Group C CDL, the State must indicate on 
the CDL, if issued, that the person is restricted from 
operating a passenger vehicle requiring a Group A 
or B CDL 
(O) - No tractor trailer CMV:   If an applicant 
performs the skills test in a combination vehicle for 
a Group A CDL with the power unit and towed unit 
connected with a pintle hook or other non-fifth wheel 
connection, the State must indicate on the CDL, if 
issued, that the person is restricted from operating 
a tractor-trailer combination connected by a fifth 
wheel that requires a Group A CDL.    
An applicant who passes a skills test using a 
combination vehicle that is NOT a Truck Tractor 
Semi-Trailer combination, but is otherwise 
equipped with a fifth wheel, will be issued a CDL 
with an “O” restriction.  
(P) - No passengers in CMV bus:   A CLP holder 
with a P endorsement is prohibited from operating a 
CMV carrying passengers, other than Federal/State 
auditors and inspectors, test examiners, other 
trainees, and the CDL holder accompanying the 
CLP holder as prescribed by § CFR 383.25(a)(1) of 
this part. 
A CLP holder with a S endorsement is prohibited 
from operating a school bus with  passengers, other 
than Federal/State auditors and inspectors, test 
examiners, other trainees, and the CDL holder 
accompanying the CLP holder as prescribed by § 
CFR 383.25(a)(1) of this part.  
(V) - Medical Variance:  If the State is notified 
according to § 383.73(o)(3) that the driver has been 
issued a medical variance, the State must indicate 
the existence of such a medical variance on the 
CDLIS driver record and the CDL document, if 
issued, using the restriction code ‘‘V’’ to indicate 
there is information about a medical variance on the 
CDLIS driver record. 
(X) - No cargo in CMV tank vehicle:  A CLP holder 
with an N endorsement may only operate an empty 
tank vehicle and is prohibited from operating any 
tank vehicle that previously contained hazardous 
materials that has not been purged of any residue. 
 (Z) - No full air brake equipped CMV:  If an 
applicant performs the skills test in a vehicle 
equipped with air over hydraulic brakes, the State 
must indicate on the CDL, if issued, that the person 
is restricted from operating a CMV equipped with 
any braking system operating fully on the air brake 
principle.  For the purposes of the skills test and the 
restriction, air over hydraulic brakes includes any 
braking system operating partially on the air brake 
and partially on the hydraulic brake principle. 
Any additional jurisdictional restrictions that apply to 
the CLP driving privilege. 
To Get a CDL or CLP 
To get a CDL or CLP, you must pass knowledge and 
skills tests. This manual will help you pass the tests, 
however, it is not a substitute for a truck driver 
training class or program. Formal training is the 
most reliable way to learn the many special skills 
required for safely driving a large commercial 
vehicle and becoming a professional driver in the 
trucking industry.  
Figure 1.1 helps you determine if 
you need a CDL 
--- PAGE 20 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System  
Section 1 - Introduction Page 1-4 
Version: July 2017 
Figure 1.1 
NOTE:  A bus may be Class A, B, or C depending on whether the GVWR is over 26,001 pounds or is a combination vehicle. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System  
Section 1 - Introduction Page 1-5 
Version: July 2017 
1.1 – Commercial Driver License Tests 
1.1.1 – Knowledge Tests 
You will have to take one or more knowledge tests, 
depending on what class of license and what 
endorsements you need. The CDL knowledge tests 
include: 
The general knowledge test, taken by all 
applicants. 
The passenger transport test, taken by all bus 
driver applicants. 
The air brakes test, which you must take if your 
vehicle has air brakes, including air over hydraulic 
brakes. 
The combination vehicles test, which is required 
if you want to drive combination vehicles. 
The hazardous materials test, required if you 
want to haul hazardous materials as defined in 49 
CFR 383.5.  In order to obtain this endorsement 
you are also required to pass a Transportation 
Security Administration (TSA) background check. 
The tank vehicle test, required if you want to haul 
any  liquid or gaseous materials  in a tank or tanks 
having an individual rated capacity of more than 
119 gallons and an aggregate rated capacity of 
1,000 gallons or more that is either permanently or 
temporarily attached to the vehicle or chassis 
The doubles/triples test, required if you want to 
pull double or triple trailers. 
The School Bus test, required if you want to drive 
a school bus. 
1.1.2 – Skills Tests 
If you pass the required knowledge test(s), you can 
take the CDL skills test when you are eligible. The 
CDL Skills Test consists of three segments:  
Vehicle inspection, basic vehicle control, and on-
road driving. You must take the segments in the 
order listed and must pass each one before moving 
to the next.  You must take these tests in the type of 
vehicle for which you wish to be licensed.   Any 
vehicle that has components marked or labeled 
cannot be used for the CDL Skills Test. 
Vehicle Inspection. You will be tested to see if you 
know whether your vehicle is safe to drive. You will 
be asked to do a Vehicle inspection of your vehicle.  
You must point to/touch and name the item you are 
inspecting and explain to the examiner what you 
would inspect and why.  
Basic Vehicle Control. You will be tested on your 
skill to control the vehicle. You will be asked to move 
your vehicle forward, backward, and turn it within a 
defined area. These areas may be marked with 
traffic lanes, cones, barriers, or something similar. 
The examiner will tell you how each control test is to 
be done.  
On-road Test. You will be tested on your skill to 
safely drive your vehicle in a variety of traffic 
situations. The situations may include left and right 
turns, intersections, railroad crossings, curves, up 
and down grades, single or multi-lane roads, 
streets, or highways. The examiner will tell you 
where to drive.  
Figure 1.2 details which sections of this manual you 
should study for each particular class of license and 
for each endorsement. 
What Sections Should You Study? 
LICENSE 
TYPE ENDORSEMENT 
Class A 
Class B 
Class C 
Hazardous 
Materials
Double / Triple 
Tank Vehicles 
Passenger 
School Bus 
Sections to Study 
1 X X X 
2 X X X X X X 
3 X X X 
4 X 
5* X X X X 
6 X X X 
7 X 
8 X 
9 X X 
10 X 
11 X X X X X 
12 X X X X X 
13 X X X X X 
*Study section 5 if you plan to operate vehicles
equipped with air brakes. 
Figure 1.2 – What to Study 
--- PAGE 22 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System  
Section 1 - Introduction Page 1-6 
Version: July 2017 
1.2 – Medical Documentation 
Requirements 
Starting January 30, 2012 and no later than January 
30, 2014, if you are applying for a CDL Permit; or 
are renewing, upgrading, adding endorsements to a 
CDL; or transferring a CDL from another state, you 
are required to provide information to your State 
Driver’s License Agency (SDLA) regarding the type 
of commercial motor vehicle operation you drive in 
or expect to drive in with your CDL. Drivers 
operating in certain types of commerce will be 
required to submit a cur rent medical examiner’s 
certificate and/or any medical variance documents 
that you have been issued (i.e. Vision, Skills 
Performance or Diabetic waivers, or other 
exemptions) to your SDLA to obtain a “certified” 
medical status as part of your driving recor d. You 
must contact your State Driver Licensing Agency 
(SDLA) to obtain information regarding the 
requirement for submitting these documents. 
If you are required to have a ”certified” medical 
status and fail to provide and keep up- to-date your 
medical exam iner’s certificate you become ”not -
certified” and may lose your CDL.   
For the purpose of complying with the new 
requirements for medical certification, it is important 
to know how you are using the CMV. The following 
information will help you decide how to self-certify: 
1.2.1 – Interstate or Intrastate Commerce 
Do you, or will you, use a CDL to operate a CMV in 
interstate or intrastate commerce? 
Interstate commerce is when you drive a CMV: 
From one State to another State or a foreign 
country; 
Between two places within a State, but during part 
of the trip, the CMV crosses into another State or 
foreign country; or 
Between two places within a State, but the cargo or 
passengers are part of a trip that began or will end 
in another State or foreign country. 
Intrastate commerce  is when you drive a CMV 
within a State and you do not meet any of the 
descriptions above for interstate commerce. 
If you operate in both intrastate commerce  and 
interstate commerce, you must choose interstate 
commerce. 
1.2.2 – Inter/Intrastate Commerce: Status Non-
excepted or Excepted?  
Once you decide whether you will operate in 
interstate commerce  or intrastate commerce , 
you must decide whether you will operate (or expect 
to operate) in a non-excepted or excepted status. 
This decision will tell you to which of the four types 
of commerce you must self-certify. 
Interstate Commerce: 
You operate in excepted interstate commerce  
when you drive a CMV in interstate commerce only 
for the following excepted activities: 
To transport school children and/or school staff 
between home and school; 
As Federal, State or local government employees; 
To transport human corpses or sick or injured 
persons; 
Fire truck or rescue vehicle drivers during 
emergencies and other related activities; 
Primarily in the transportation of propane winter 
heating fuel when responding to an emergency 
condition requiring immediate response such as 
damage to a propane gas system after a storm or 
flooding; 
In Response to a pipeline emergency condition 
requiring immediate response such as a pipeline 
leak or rupture; 
In custom harvesting on a farm or to transport farm 
machinery and supplies used in the custom 
harvesting operation to and from a farm or to 
transport custom harvested crops to storage or 
market; 
Beekeeper in the seasonal transportation of bees; 
Controlled and operated by a farmer, but is not a 
combination vehicle (power unit and towed unit), 
and is used to transport agricultural products, farm 
machinery or farm supplies (no placardable 
hazardous materials) to and from a farm and within 
150 air-miles of the farm; 
As a private motor carrier of passengers for non-
business purposes; or 
To transport migrant workers. 
If you answered yes to one or more of the above 
activities as the only operation in which you drive, 
you operate in excepted interstate commerce and 
do not need a Federal medical examiner’s 
certificate. 
--- PAGE 23 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System  
Section 1 - Introduction Page 1-7 
Version: July 2017 
If you answered no to all of the above activities, you 
operate in non-excepted interstate commerce  
and are required to provide a current medical 
examiner’s certificate (49 CFR 391.45),  commonly 
referred to as a medical certificate or DOT card, to 
your State Driver Licensing Agency (SDLA).  Most 
CDL holders who drive CMVs in interstate 
commerce are non-excepted interstate 
commerce drivers. 
If you operate in both excepted interstate 
commerce and non-excepted interstate 
commerce, you must choose non-excepted 
interstate commerce to be qualified to operate in 
both types of interstate commerce. 
Intrastate Commerce:
You operate in excepted Intrastate commerce  
when you drive a CMV only in intrastate commerce 
activities for which your State of licensure has 
determined do not require you to meet the State’s 
medical certification requirements.  (Contact your 
SDLA about their requirements). 
You operate in non-excepted intrastate 
commerce when you drive a CMV only in intrastate 
commerce and are required to meet your State of 
licensure’s medical certification requirements 
(Contact your SDLA about their requirements). 
If you operate in both excepted intrastate 
commerce and non-excepted intrastate 
commerce, you must choose non-excepted 
intrastate commerce. 
1.2.3 – Self-Certification Statements 
When completing an application for your CDL, you 
will be required to check the box next to the 
statement that describes your status.  The actual 
statements on your application may vary from those 
shown below: 
 Interstate non-excepted: I certify that I operate 
or expect to operate in interstate commerce, 
that I am subject to and meet the Federal DOT 
medical card requirements under 49 CFR part 
391; and that I am required to obtain a medical 
examiner’s certificate.
 Interstate excepted: I certify that I operate or 
expect to operate in interstate commerce, but 
engage exclusively in transportation or 
operations excepted under 49 CFR §§390.3(f), 
391.2, 391.68 or 398.3 from all or parts of the 
qualification requirements of 49 CFR part 391; 
and that  I am not required to obtain a medical 
examiner’s certificate.
 Intrastate non-excepted: I certify that I operate 
or expect to operate entirely in intrastate 
commerce, that I am subject to and meet the 
medical requirements for my State; and that I 
am required to obtain a medical examiner’s 
certificate. 
 Intrastate excepted: I certify that I operate or 
expect to operate entirely in intrastate 
commerce, that I am not subject to the medical 
requirements for my State; and that I am not 
required to obtain a medical examiner’s 
certificate. 
1.3 - CDL Disqualifications
1.3.1 – General 
You may not drive a commercial motor vehicle if you 
are disqualified for any reason. 
1.3.2 – Alcohol, Leaving the Scene of an 
Accident, and Commission of a Felony 
It is illegal to operate a CMV if your blood alcohol 
concentration (BAC) is .04% or more. If you operate 
a CMV, you shall be deemed to have given your 
consent to alcohol testing. 
You will lose your CDL for at least one year for a first 
offense for: 
Driving a CMV if your blood alcohol concentration 
is .04% or higher. 
Driving a CMV under the influence of alcohol. 
Refusing to undergo blood alcohol testing. 
Driving a CMV while under the influence of a 
controlled substance. 
Leaving the scene of an accident involving a CMV. 
Committing a felony involving the use of a CMV. 
Driving a CMV when the CDL is suspended. 
Causing a fatality through negligent operation of a 
CMV. 
You will lose your CDL for at least three years if the 
offense occurs while you are operating a CMV that 
is placarded for hazardous materials.  
You will lose your CDL for life for a second offense. 
You will lose your CDL for life if you use a CMV to 
commit a felony involving controlled substances. 
--- PAGE 24 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System  
Section 1 - Introduction Page 1-8 
Version: July 2017 
You will be put out- of-service for 24 hours if you 
have any detectable amount of alcohol under .04%. 
1.3.3 – Serious Traffic Violations 
Serious traffic violations are excessive speeding (15 
mph or more above the posted limit), reckless 
driving, improper or erratic lane changes, following 
a vehicle too closely, traffic offenses committed in a 
CMV in connection with fatal traffic accidents , 
driving a CMV without obtaining a CDL or having a 
CDL in the driver’s possession, and driving a C MV 
without the proper class of CDL and/or 
endorsements. 
You will lose your CDL: 
For at least 60 days if you have committed two 
serious traffic violations within a three-year period 
involving a CMV. 
For at least 120 days for three or more serious 
traffic violations within a three-year period involving 
a CMV. 
1.3.4 – Violation of Out-of-Service Orders  
You will lose your CDL: 
[For at least 90 days if you have committed your 
first violation of an out-of-service order. 
For at least one year if you have committed two 
violations of an out-of-service order in a ten-year 
period. 
For at least three years if you have committed 
three or more violations of an out-of-service order 
in a ten-year period]. 
1.3.5 – Railroad-highway Grade Crossing 
Violations 
You will lose your CDL: 
For at least 60 days for your first violation. 
For at least 120 days for your second violation 
within a three-year period. 
For at least one year for your third violation within a 
three-year period. 
These violations include violation of a federal, state 
or local law or regulation pertaining to one of the 
following six offenses at a railroad-highway grade 
crossing: 
For drivers who are not required to always stop, 
failing to stop before reaching the crossing if the 
tracks are not clear. 
For drivers who are not required to always stop, 
failing to slow down and check that the tracks are 
clear of an approaching train. 
For drivers who are always required to stop, failing 
to stop before driving onto the crossing. 
For all drivers failing to have sufficient space to 
drive completely through the crossing without 
stopping.  
For all drivers failing to obey a traffic control device 
or the directions of an enforcement official at the 
crossing. 
For all drivers failing to negotiate a crossing 
because of insufficient undercarriage clearance. 
1.3.6 – Hazardous Materials Endorsement 
Background Check and Disqualifications 
If you require a hazardous materials endorsement 
you will be required to submit your fingerprints and 
be subject to a background check. 
You will be denied or you will lose your hazardous 
materials endorsement if you: 
Are not a lawful permanent resident of the United 
States. 
Renounce your United States citizenship. 
Are wanted or under indictment for certain felonies. 
Have a conviction in military or civilian court for 
certain felonies. 
Have been adjudicated as lacking mental capacity 
or have been involuntarily committed to a mental 
health facility as specified in §1572.109. 
Are considered to pose a security threat as 
determined by the Transportation Security 
Administration. 
The background check procedures vary from 
jurisdiction to jurisdiction.  Your licensing agency 
will provide you with all the information you need to 
complete the required TSA background check 
procedures.  
1.3.7 – Traffic Violations in Your Personal 
Vehicle 
The Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act 
(MCSIA) of 1999 requires a CDL holder to be 
disqualified from operating a commercial motor 
vehicle if the CDL holder has been convicted of 
certain types of moving violations in their personal 
vehicle.
--- PAGE 25 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System  
Section 1 - Introduction Page 1-9 
Version: July 2017 
If your privilege to operate your personal vehicle is 
revoked, cancelled, or suspended due to violations 
of traffic control laws (other than parking violations) 
you will also lose your CDL driving privileges. 
If your privilege to operate your personal vehicle is 
revoked, cancelled, or suspended due to alcohol , 
controlled substance or felony violations, you will 
lose your CDL for 1 year.  If you are convicted of a 
second violation in your personal vehicle or CMV 
you will lose your CDL for life. 
If your license to operate your personal vehicle is 
revoked, cancelled, or suspended you may not 
obtain a “hardship” license to operate a CMV. 
1.4 – Other CDL Rules 
There are other federal and state rules that affect 
drivers operating CMVs in all states. Among them 
are: 
You cannot have more than one license. If you 
break this rule, a court may fine you up to $5,000 
or put you in jail and keep your home state license 
and return any others. 
You must notify your employer within 30 days of 
conviction for any traffic violations (except parking). 
This is true no matter what type of vehicle you 
were driving. 
You must notify your motor vehicle licensing 
agency within 30 days if you are convicted in any 
other jurisdiction of any traffic violation (except 
parking). This is true no matter what type of vehicle 
you were driving. 
You must notify your employer within two business 
days if your license is suspended, revoked, or 
canceled, or if you are disqualified from driving. 
You must give your employer information on all 
driving jobs you have held for the past 10 years. 
You must do this when you apply for a commercial 
driving job. 
No one can drive a commercial motor vehicle 
without a CDL. A court may fine you up to $5,000 
or put you in jail for breaking this rule. 
If you have a hazardous materials endorsement 
you must notify and surrender your hazardous 
materials endorsement to the state that issued 
your CDL within 24 hours of any conviction or 
indictment in any jurisdiction, civilian or military, for, 
or found not guilty by reason of insanity of a 
disqualifying crime listed in 49 CFR 1572.103; who 
is adjudicated as lacking mental capacity or have 
been involuntarily committed to a mental institution 
as specified in 49 CFR 1572.109; or who 
renounces his or her U. S. citizenship; 
Your employer may not let you drive a commercial 
motor vehicle if you have more than one license or 
if you’re CDL is suspended or revoked. A court 
may fine the employer up to $5,000 or put him/her 
in jail for breaking this rule. 
All states are connected to one computerized 
system to share information about CDL drivers. 
The states will check on drivers' accident records 
to be sure that drivers do not have more than one 
CDL. 
You are not allowed to hold a mobile telephone to 
conduct a voice communication or dial a mobile 
telephone by pressing more than a single button 
when driving. 
You are not allowed to send or read text messages 
while driving. 
You must be properly restrained by a safety belt 
at all times while operating a commercial motor 
vehicle.  The safety belt design holds the driver 
securely behind the wheel during a crash, 
helping the driver to control the vehicle and 
reduces the chance of serious injury or death.  If 
you do not wear a safety belt, you are four times 
more likely to be fatally injured if you are thrown 
from the vehicle. 
Your state may have additional rules that you 
must also obey. 
1.5 – International Registration Plan 
 International Fuel Tax Agreement 
If you operate a CDL required vehicle in interstate 
commerce, the vehicle, with few exceptions, is 
required to be registered under the International 
Registration Plan (IRP) and the International Fuel 
Tax Agreement (IFTA). These federally mandated 
programs provide for the equitable collection and 
distribution of vehicle license fees and motor fuels 
taxes for vehicles traveling throughout the 48 
contiguous United States and 10 Canadian 
provinces. 
Under the IRP, jurisdictions must register 
apportioned vehicles which includes issuing license 
plates and cab cards or proper credentials, 
calculate, collect and distribute IRP fees, audit 
carriers for accuracy of reported distance and fees 
and enforce IRP requirements. 
--- PAGE 26 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System  
Section 1 - Introduction Page 1-10 
Version: July 2017 
Registrant responsibilities under the Plan include 
applying for IRP registration with base jurisdiction, 
providing proper documentation for registration, 
paying appropriate IRP registration fees, properly 
displaying registration credentials, maintaining 
accurate distance records, and making records 
available for jurisdiction review. 
The basic concept behind IFTA is to allow a licensee 
(motor carrier) to license in a base jurisdiction for 
the reporting and payment of motor fuel use taxes. 
Under the IFTA, a licensee is issued one set of 
credentials which will authorize operations through 
all IFTA member jurisdictions.  The fuel use taxes 
collected pursuant to the IFTA are calculated based 
on the number of miles (kilometers) traveled and the 
number of gallons (liters) consumed in the member 
jurisdictions. The licensee files one quarterly tax 
return with the base jurisdiction by which the 
licensee will report all operations through all IFTA 
member jurisdictions. 
It is the base jurisdiction's responsibility to remit the 
taxes collected to other member jurisdictions and to 
represent the other member jurisdictions in the tax 
collection process, including the performance of 
audits. 
An IFTA licensee must retain records to support the 
information reported on the IFTA quarterly tax return 
The IRP registrant and the IFTA licensee may be 
the vehicle owner or the vehicle operator. 
The requirement for acquiring IRP plates for a 
vehicle and IFTA license for a  motor carrier is 
determined by the definitions from the IRP Plan and 
the IFTA for Qualified Vehicle and Qualified Motor 
Vehicle: 
For purposes of IRP: 
A Qualified Vehicle is (except as provided below) 
any Power Unit that is used or 
intended for use in two or more Member 
Jurisdictions and that is used for the transportation 
of persons for hire or designed, used, or maintained 
primarily for the transportation of property, and: 
(i) has two Axles and a gross Vehicle weight or 
registered gross Vehicle weight in 
(ii) excess of 26,000 pounds (11,793.401 
kilograms), or 
(iii) has three or more Axles, regardless of weight, 
or 
(iv) is used in combination, when the gross Vehicle 
weight of such combination excee ds 26,000 
pounds (11,793.401 kilograms). 
While similar, the Qualified Motor Vehicle in IFTA 
means a motor vehicle used, designed, or 
maintained for transportation of persons or property 
and: 
1) Having two axles and a gross vehicle weight
or registered gross vehicle weight exceeding
26,000 pounds or 11,797 kilograms; or
2) Is used in combination, when the weight of
such combination exceeds 26,000 pounds or
11,797 kilograms gross vehicle or registered
gross vehicle weight.  Qualified Motor Vehicle
does not include recreational vehicles.
If the vehicle you operate is registered under IRP 
and you are a motor carrier licensed under IFTA, 
then you are required to comply with the 
mandatory record keeping requirements for 
operating the vehicle. A universally accepted 
method of capturing this information is through the 
completion of an Individual Vehicle Distance 
Record (IVDR), sometimes times referred to as a 
Driver Trip Report. This document reflects the 
distance traveled and fuel purchased for a vehicle 
that operates interstate under apportioned (IRP) 
registration and IFTA fuel tax credentials. 
Although the actual format of the IVDR may vary, the 
information that is required for proper record keeping 
does not. 
In order to satisfy the requirements for Individual 
Vehicle Distance Records, these documents must 
include the following information: 
Distance 
Per Article IV of the IRP Plan 
(i) Date of trip (starting and ending)  
(ii) Trip origin and destination – City and State 
or Province 
(iii) Route(s) of travel  
(iv) Beginning and ending odometer or 
      hubometer reading of the trip 
(v) Total distance traveled 
(vi) In-Jurisdiction distance  
(vii) Power unit number or vehicle identification 
       number. 
Fuel 
Per Section P560 of the IFTA Procedures Manual 
.300 An acceptable receipt or invoice must  
 include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
.005 Date of purchase 
.010 Seller's name and address 
.015 Number of gallons or liters purchased; 
.020 Fuel type 
.025 Price per gallon or liter or total amount of 
        sale 
.030 Unit number or other unique vehicle 
        identifier 
.035 Purchaser's name 
--- PAGE 27 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System  
Section 1 - Introduction Page 1-11 
Version: July 2017 
An example of an IVDR that must be completed in 
its entirety for each trip can be found in Figure 1 
below.  Each individual IVDR should be filled out for 
only one vehicle.  The rules to follow when trying to 
determine how and when to log an odometer 
reading are the following: 
 At the beginning of the day
 When leaving the state or province
 At the end of the trip/day
Not only do the trips need to be logged, but the fuel 
purchases need to be documented as well.  You must 
obtain a receipt for all fueling and include it with your 
completed IVDR. 
Make sure that any trips that you enter are always 
filled out in descending order and that your trips 
include all state/provinces that you traveled through 
on your route. 
There are different routes that a driver may take, 
and most of the miles may be within one state or 
province.  Whether or not the distance you travel is 
primarily in one jurisdiction or spread among several 
jurisdictions, all information for the trip must be 
recorded. This includes the dates, the routes, 
odometer readings and fuel purchases.   By 
completing this document in full and keeping all 
records required by both the IRP and the IFTA, you 
will have ensured that you and your company are in 
compliance with all State and Provincial laws 
surrounding fuel and distance record keeping 
requirements. 
The IVDR serves as the source document for the 
calculation of fees and taxes that are payable to the 
jurisdictions in which the vehicle is operated, so 
these original records must be maintained for a 
minimum of four years. 
In addition, these records are subject to audit by the 
taxing jurisdictions. Failure to maintain complete 
and accurate records could result in fines, penalties 
and suspension or revocation of IRP registrations 
and IFTA  licenses.  
For additional information on the IRP and the 
requirements related to the IRP, contact your base 
jurisdiction motor vehicle department or IRP, Inc. 
the official repository for the IRP.  Additional 
information can be found on the IRP, Inc. website at 
www.irponline.org
.  There is a training video on the 
website home page available in English, Spanish 
and French 
For additional information on IFTA and the 
requirements related to IFTA, contact the 
appropriate agency in your base jurisdiction.  You 
will also find useful information about the 
Agreement at the official repository of IFTA at 
http://www.iftach.org/index.php
.   
Figure 1 – Individual Vehicle Mileage & Fuel Record (Example)

--- PAGE 28 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
