Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-1 
Version: July 2017 
Section 2 
DRIVING SAFELY 
This Section Covers 
 Vehicle Inspection
 Basic Control of Your Vehicle
 Shifting Gears
 Seeing
 Communicating
 Space Management
 Controlling Your Speed
 Seeing Hazards
 Distracted Driving
 Aggressive Drivers/Road Rage
 Night Driving & Driver Fatigue
 Driving in Fog
 Winter Driving
 Hot Weather Driving
 Railroad-highway Crossings
 Mountain Driving
 Driving Emergencies
 Antilock Braking Systems
 Skid Control and Recovery
 Accident Procedures
 Fires
 Alcohol, Other Drugs, and Driving
 Hazardous Materials Rules
This section contains knowledge and safe driving 
information that all commercial drivers should know. 
You must pass a test on this information to get a 
CDL. This section does not have specific 
information on air brakes, combination vehicles, 
doubles, or passenger vehicles. When preparing for 
the Vehicle Inspection Test, you must review the 
material in Section 11 in addition to the information 
in this section. This section does have basic 
information on hazardous materials (HazMat) that 
all drivers should know. If you need a HazMat 
endorsement, you should study Section 9. 
2.1 – Vehicle Inspection 
2.1.1 – Why Inspect 
Safety is the most important reason you inspect 
your vehicle, safety for yourself and for other road 
users. 
A vehicle defect found during an inspection could 
save you problems later. You could have a 
breakdown on the road that will cost time and 
dollars, or even worse, a crash caused by the 
defect. 
Federal and state laws require that drivers inspect 
their vehicles. Federal and state inspectors also 
may inspect your vehicles. If they judge the vehicle 
to be unsafe, they will put it "out of service" until it is 
fixed. 
2.1.2 – Types of Vehicle Inspection 
Vehicle Inspection. A Vehicle inspection will help 
you find problems that could cause a crash or 
breakdown. 
During a Trip. For safety you should: 
Watch gauges for signs of trouble. 
Use your senses to check for problems (look, 
listen, smell, feel). 
Check critical items when you stop: 
Tires, wheels and rims. 
Brakes. 
Lights and reflectors. 
Brake and electrical connections to trailer. 
Trailer coupling devices. 
Cargo securement devices. 
After-trip Inspection and Report. You should do 
an after-trip inspection at the end of the trip, day, or 
tour of duty on each vehicle you operated. It may 
include filling out a vehicle condition report listing 
any problems you find. The inspection report helps 
a motor carrier know when the vehicle needs 
repairs. 
2.1.3 – What to Look For 
Tire Problems 
Too much or too little air pressure. 
Bad wear. You need at least 4/32-inch tread depth 
in every major groove on front tires. You need 2/32 
inch on other tires. No fabric should show through 
the tread or sidewall. 
Cuts or other damage. 
Tread separation. 
Dual tires that come in contact with each other or 
parts of the vehicle. 
Mismatched sizes. 
Radial and bias-ply tires used together. 
Cut or cracked valve stems. 
Re-grooved, recapped, or retreaded tires on the 
front wheels of a bus are prohibited. 
Wheel and Rim Problems 
--- PAGE 29 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-2 
Version: July 2017 
Damaged rims. 
Rust around wheel nuts may mean the nuts are 
loose--check tightness. After a tire has been 
changed, stop a short while later and re-check 
tightness of nuts. 
Missing clamps, spacers, studs, or lugs means 
danger. 
Mismatched, bent, or cracked lock rings are 
dangerous. 
Wheels or rims that have had welding repairs are 
not safe. 
Bad Brake Drums or Shoes 
Cracked drums. 
Shoes or pads with oil, grease, or brake fluid on 
them. 
Shoes worn dangerously thin, missing, or broken. 
Steering System Defects 
Missing nuts, bolts, cotter keys, or other parts. 
Bent, loose, or broken parts, such as steering 
column, steering gear box, or tie rods. 
If power steering equipped, check hoses, pumps, 
and fluid level; check for leaks. 
Steering wheel play of more than 10 degrees 
(approximately 2 inches movement at the rim of a 
20-inch steering wheel) can make it hard to steer. 
Figure 2.1 
Suspension System Defects.  The suspension 
system holds up the vehicle and its load. It keeps 
the axles in place. Therefore, broken suspension 
parts can be extremely dangerous. Look for: 
Spring hangers that allow movement of axle from 
proper position. See Figure 2.2. 
  Figure 2.2 
Cracked or broken spring hangers. 
Missing or broken leaves in any leaf spring. If one-
fourth or more are missing, it will put the vehicle 
"out of service", but any defect could be 
dangerous. See Figure 2.3. 
   Figure 2.3 

--- PAGE 30 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-3 
Version: July 2017 
Broken leaves in a multi-leaf spring or leaves that 
have shifted so they might hit a tire or other part. 
Leaking shock absorbers. 
Torque rod or arm, u-bolts, spring hangers, or 
other axle positioning parts that are cracked, 
damaged, or missing. 
Air suspension systems that are damaged and/or 
leaking. See Figure 2.4. 
   Figure 2.4 
Any loose, cracked, broken, or missing frame 
members.  
Exhaust System Defects. A broken exhaust 
system can let poison fumes into the cab or sleeper 
berth. Look for: 
Loose, broken, or missing exhaust pipes, mufflers, 
tailpipes, or vertical stacks. 
Loose, broken, or missing mounting brackets, 
clamps, bolts, or nuts. 
Exhaust system parts rubbing against fuel system 
parts, tires, or other moving parts of vehicle. 
Exhaust system parts that are leaking. 
Emergency Equipment.  Vehicles must be 
equipped with emergency equipment. Look for: 
Fire extinguisher(s). 
Spare electrical fuses (unless equipped with circuit 
breakers). 
Warning devices for parked vehicles:   three 
reflective triangles or at least 6 fusees or 3 liquid 
burning flares). 
Cargo (Trucks). You must make sure the truck is 
not overloaded and the cargo is balanced and 
secured before each trip. If the cargo contains 
hazardous materials, you must inspect for proper 
papers and placarding. 
2.1.4 – CDL Vehicle Inspection Test 
In order to obtain a CDL you will be required to pass 
a Vehicle inspection test. You will be tested to see if 
you know whether your vehicle is safe to drive. You 
will be asked to do a Vehicle inspection of your 
vehicle.  You must point to/touch and name the item 
you are inspecting and explain to the examiner what 
you would inspect and why. The following seven-
step inspection method should be useful. 
2.1.5 – Seven-step Inspection Method 
Method of Inspection. You should do a Vehicle 
inspection the same way each time so you will learn 
all the steps and be less likely to forget something.  
Approaching the Vehicle. Notice general 
condition. Look for damage or vehicle leaning to one 
side. Look under the vehicle for fresh oil, coolant, 
grease, or fuel leaks. Check the area around the 
vehicle for hazards to vehicle movement (people, 
other vehicles, objects, low-hanging wires, limbs, 
etc.). 
Vehicle Inspection Guide 
Step 1: Vehicle Overview 
Review Last Vehicle Inspection Report. Drivers 
may have to make a vehicle inspection report in 
writing each day. The motor carrier must repair any 
items in the report that affect safety and certify on 
the report that repairs were made or were 
unnecessary. You must sign the report only if 
defects were noted and certified to be repaired or 
not needed to be repaired. 
Step 2: Check Engine Compartment 
Check That the Parking Brakes Are On and/or 
Wheels Chocked. 
You may have to raise the hood, tilt the cab (secure 
loose things so they don't fall and break something), 
or open the engine compartment door.  
Check the following: 
Engine oil level. 
Coolant level in radiator; condition of hoses. 
Power steering fluid level; hose condition (if so 
equipped). 
Windshield washer fluid level. 
Battery fluid level, connections and tie downs 
(battery may be located elsewhere) 
Automatic transmission fluid level (may require 
engine to be running). 
Check belts for tightness and excessive wear 
(alternator, water pump, air compressor)--learn 

--- PAGE 31 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-4 
Version: July 2017 
how much "give" the belts should have when 
adjusted right, and check each one. 
Leaks in the engine compartment (fuel, coolant, oil, 
power steering fluid, hydraulic fluid, battery fluid). 
Cracked, worn electrical wiring insulation. 
Lower and secure hood, cab, or engine 
compartment door. 
Step 3: Start Engine and Inspect Inside the Cab 
Get In and Start Engine 
Make sure parking brake is on. 
Put gearshift in neutral (or "park" if automatic). 
Start engine; listen for unusual noises. 
If equipped, check the Anti-lock Braking System 
(ABS) indicator lights.  Light on dash should come 
on and then turn off.  If it stays on the ABS is not 
working properly.  For trailers only, if the yellow 
light on the left rear of the trailer stays on, the ABS 
is not working properly.    
Look at the Gauges 
Oil pressure. Should come up to normal within 
seconds after engine is started. See Figure 2.5 
Air pressure. Pressure should build from 50 to 90 
psi within 3 minutes.  Build air pressure to governor 
cut-out (usually around 120 – 140 psi.  Know your 
vehicle’s requirements.   
Ammeter and/or voltmeter. Should be in normal 
range(s). 
Coolant temperature. Should begin gradual rise to 
normal operating range. 
Engine oil temperature. Should begin gradual rise 
to normal operating range. 
Warning lights and buzzers. Oil, coolant, charging 
circuit warning, and antilock brake system lights 
should go out right away.  
Check Condition of Controls. Check all of the 
following for looseness, sticking, damage, or 
improper setting: 
Steering wheel. 
Clutch. 
Accelerator ("gas pedal"). 
Brake controls. 
Foot brake. 
Trailer brake (if vehicle has one). 
Parking brake. 
Retarder controls (if vehicle has them). 
Transmission controls. 
Interaxle differential lock (if vehicle has one). 
Horn(s). 
Windshield wiper/washer. 
Lights. 
Headlights. 
Dimmer switch. 
Turn signal. 
Four-way flashers. 
Parking, clearance, identification, marker 
switch(es). 
Figure 2.5 
Check Mirrors and Windshield. Inspect mirrors 
and windshield for cracks, dirt, illegal stickers, or 
other obstructions to seeing clearly. Clean and 
adjust as necessary. 
Check Emergency Equipment 
Check for safety equipment: 
Spare electrical fuses (unless vehicle has circuit 
breakers). 
Three red reflective triangles , 6 fusees or 3 liquid 
burning flares. 
Properly charged and rated fire extinguisher. 
Check for optional items such as: 
Chains (where winter conditions require). 
Tire changing equipment. 
List of emergency phone numbers 
Accident reporting kit (packet). 

--- PAGE 32 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-5 
Version: July 2017 
Check Safety Belt.  Check that the safety belt is 
securely mounted, adjusts ; latches properly and is 
not ripped or frayed. 
Step 4: Turn Off Engine and Check Lights 
Make sure the parking brake is set, turn off the 
engine, and take the key with you. Turn on 
headlights (low beams) and four-way emergency 
flashers, and get out of the vehicle. 
Step 5: Do Walk-around Inspection 
Go to front of vehicle and check that low beams 
are on and both of the four-way flashers are 
working. 
Push dimmer switch and check that high beams 
work. 
Turn off headlights and four-way emergency 
flashers. 
Turn on parking, clearance, side-marker, and 
identification lights. 
Turn on right turn signal, and start walk-around 
inspection. 
General 
Walk around and inspect. 
Clean all lights, reflectors, and glass as you go 
along. 
Left Front Side 
Driver's door glass should be clean. 
Door latches or locks should work properly. 
Left front wheel. 
Condition of wheel and rim --missing, bent, broken 
studs, clamps, lugs, or any signs of misalignment. 
Condition of tires--properly inflated, valve stem and 
cap , no serious cuts, bulges, or tread wear. 
Use wrench to test rust-streaked lug nuts, indicating 
looseness. 
Hub oil level, no leaks. 
Left front suspension. 
Condition of spring, spring hangers, shackles, 
u-bolts. 
Shock absorber condition. 
Left front brake. 
Condition of brake drum or disc. 
Condition of hoses. 
Front 
Condition of front axle.
Condition of steering system. 
No loose, worn, bent, damaged or missing parts. 
Must grab steering mechanism to test for 
looseness. 
Condition of windshield. 
Check for damage and clean if dirty. 
Check windshield wiper arms for proper spring 
tension. 
Check wiper blades for damage, "stiff" rubber, and 
securement. 
Lights and reflectors. 
Parking, clearance, and identification lights clean, 
operating, and proper color (amber at front). 
Reflectors clean and proper color (amber at front). 
Right front turn signal light clean, operating, and 
proper color (amber or white on signals facing 
forward). 
Right Side 
Right front: check all items as done on left front. 
Primary and secondary safety cab locks engaged 
(if cab-over-engine design). 
Right fuel tank(s). 
Securely mounted, not damaged, or leaking. 
Fuel crossover line secure. 
Tank(s) contain enough fuel. 
Cap(s) on and secure. 
Condition of visible parts. 
Rear of engine--not leaking. 
Transmission--not leaking. 
Exhaust system --secure, not leaking, not touching 
wires, fuel, or air-lines. 
Frame and cross members--no bends or cracks. 
Air-lines and electrical wiring --secured against 
snagging, rubbing, wearing. 
Spare tire carrier or rack not damaged (if so 
equipped). 
Spare tire and/or wheel securely mounted in rack. 
Spare tire and wheel adequate (proper size, 
properly inflated). 
Cargo securement (trucks). 
Cargo properly blocked, braced, tied, chained, etc. 
Header board adequate, secure (if required). 
Side boards, stakes strong enough, free of damage, 
properly set in place (if so equipped). 
--- PAGE 33 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-6 
Version: July 2017 
Canvas or tarp (if required) properly secured to 
prevent tearing, billowing, or blocking of mirrors. 
If oversize, all required signs (flags, lamps, and 
reflectors) safely and properly mounted and all 
required permits in driver's possession. 
Curbside cargo compartment doors in good 
condition, securely closed, latched/locked and 
required security seals in place. 
Right Rear 
Condition of wheels and rims--no missing, bent, or 
broken spacers, studs, clamps, or lugs. 
Condition of tires--properly inflated, valve stems 
and caps, no serious cuts, bulges, tread wear, 
tires not rubbing each other, and nothing stuck 
between them. 
Tires same type, e.g., not mixed radial and bias 
types. 
Tires evenly matched (same sizes). 
Wheel bearing/seals not leaking. 
Suspension. 
Condition of spring(s), spring hangers, shackles, 
and u-bolts. 
Axle secure. 
Powered axle(s) not leaking lube (gear oil). 
Condition of torque rod arms, bushings. 
Condition of shock absorber(s). 
If retractable axle equipped, check condition of lift 
mechanism. If air powered, check for leaks. 
Condition of air ride components. 
Brakes. 
Brake adjustment. 
Condition of brake drum(s) or discs. 
Condition of hoses --look for any wear due to 
rubbing. 
Lights and reflectors. 
Side-marker lights clean, operating, and proper 
color (red at rear, others amber). 
Side-marker reflectors clean and proper color (red 
at rear, others amber). 
Rear 
Lights and reflectors. 
Rear clearance and identification lights clean, 
operating, and proper color (red at rear). 
Reflectors clean and proper color (red at rear). 
Taillights clean, operating, and proper color (red at 
rear). 
Right rear turn signal operating, and proper color 
(red, yellow, or amber at rear). 
License plate(s) present, clean, and secured. 
Splash guards present, not damaged, properly 
fastened, not dragging on ground, or rubbing tires. 
Cargo secure (trucks). 
Cargo properly blocked, braced, tied, chained, etc. 
Tailboards up and properly secured. 
End gates free of damage, properly secured in 
stake sockets. 
Canvas or tarp (if required) properly secured to 
prevent tearing, billowing, or blocking of either the 
rearview mirrors or rear lights. 
If over-length, or over-width, make sure all signs 
and/or additional lights/flags are safely and 
properly mounted and all required permits are in 
driver's possession. 
Rear doors securely closed, latched/locked. 
Left Side 
Check all items as done on right side, plus: 
Battery(ies) (if not mounted in engine 
compartment). 
Battery box(es) securely mounted to vehicle. 
Box has secure cover. 
Battery(ies) secured against movement. 
Battery(ies) not broken or leaking. 
Fluid in battery(ies) at proper level (except 
maintenance-free type). 
Cell caps present and securely tightened (except 
maintenance-free type). 
Vents in cell caps free of foreign material (except 
maintenance-free type). 
Step 6: Check Signal Lights 
Get In and Turn Off Lights 
Turn off all lights. 
Turn on stop lights (apply trailer hand brake or 
have a helper put on the brake pedal). 
Turn on left turn signal lights. 
Get Out and Check Lights 
Left front turn signal light clean, operating and 
proper color (amber or white on signals facing the 
front). 
Left rear turn signal light and both stop lights clean, 
operating, and proper color (red, yellow, or amber). 
--- PAGE 34 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-7 
Version: July 2017 
Get In Vehicle 
Turn off lights not needed for driving. 
Check for all required papers, trip manifests, 
permits, etc. 
Secure all loose articles in cab (they might interfere 
with operation of the controls or hit you in a crash). 
Start the engine. 
Step 7: Start the Engine and Check 
Test for Hydraulic Leaks. If the vehicle has 
hydraulic brakes, pump the brake pedal three times. 
Then apply firm pressure to the pedal and hold for 
five seconds. The pedal should not move. If it does, 
there may be a leak or other problem. Get it fixed 
before driving. If the vehicle has air brakes, do the 
checks described in Sections 5 and 6 of this manual. 
Brake System 
Test Parking Brake(s) 
Fasten safety belt 
Set parking brake (power unit only). 
Release trailer parking brake (if applicable). 
Place vehicle into a low gear. 
Gently pull forward against parking brake to make 
sure the parking brake holds. 
Repeat the same steps for the trailer with trailer 
parking brake set and power unit parking brakes 
released (if applicable). 
If it doesn't hold vehicle, it is faulty; get it fixed. 
Test Service Brake Stopping Action 
Driver pulls forward at five miles per hour. 
Push brake pedal firmly 
"Pulling" to one side or the other can mean brake 
trouble. 
Any unusual brake pedal "feel" or delayed stopping 
action can mean trouble. 
If you find anything unsafe during the Vehicle 
inspection, get it fixed. Federal and state laws forbid 
operating an unsafe vehicle. 
2.1.6 – Inspection during a Trip 
Check Vehicle Operation Regularly 
You should check: 
Instruments. 
Air pressure gauge (if you have air brakes). 
Temperature gauges. 
Pressure gauges. 
Ammeter/voltmeter. 
Mirrors. 
Tires. 
Cargo, cargo covers. 
Lights, etc 
If you see, hear, smell, or feel anything that might 
mean trouble, check it out. 
Safety Inspection. Drivers of trucks and truck 
tractors when transporting cargo must inspect the 
securement of the cargo within the first 50 miles of 
a trip and every 150 miles or every three hours 
(whichever comes first) after. 
2.1.7 – After-trip Inspection and Report 
You may have to make a written report each day on 
the condition of the vehicle(s) you drove. Report 
anything affecting safety or possibly leading to 
mechanical breakdown. 
Subsection 2.1 
Test Your Knowledge 
The vehicle inspection report tells the motor carrier 
about problems that may need fixing. Keep a copy 
of your report in the vehicle for one day. That way, 
the next driver can learn about any problems you 
have found. 
1. What is the most important reason for doing a
vehicle inspection?
2. What things should you check during a trip?
3. Name some key steering system parts.
4. Name some suspension system defects.
5. What three kinds of emergency equipment must
you have?
6. What is the minimum tread depth for front tires?
For other tires?
7. Name some things you should check on the
front of your vehicle during the walk around
inspection.
8. What should wheel bearing seals be checked
for?
9. How many red reflective triangles should you
carry?
10. How do you test hydraulic brakes for leaks?
11. Why put the starter switch key in your pocket
during the Vehicle inspection?
--- PAGE 35 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-8 
Version: July 2017 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsection 2.1. 
2.2 – Basic Control of Your Vehicle 
To drive a vehicle safely, you must be able to control 
its speed and direction. Safe operation of a 
commercial vehicle requires skill in: 
Accelerating. 
Steering. 
Stopping. 
Backing safely. 
Fasten your seatbelt when on the road. Apply the 
parking brake when you leave your vehicle. 
2.2.1 – Accelerating 
Don't roll back when you start. You may hit 
someone behind you. If you have a manual 
transmission vehicle, partly engage the clutch 
before you take your right foot off the brake. Put on 
the parking brake whenever necessary to keep from 
rolling back. Release the parking brake only when 
you have applied enough engine power to keep 
from rolling back. On a tractor-trailer equipped with 
a trailer brake hand valve, the hand valve can be 
applied to keep from rolling back. 
Speed up smoothly and gradually so the vehicle 
does not jerk. Rough acceleration can cause 
mechanical damage. When pulling a trailer, rough 
acceleration can damage the coupling. 
Speed up very gradually when traction is poor, as in 
rain or snow. If you use too much power, the drive 
wheels may spin. You could lose control. If the drive 
wheels begin to spin, take your foot off the 
accelerator. 
2.2.2 – Steering 
Hold the steering wheel firmly with both hands. Your 
hands should be on opposite sides of the wheel. If 
you hit a curb or a pothole (chuckhole), the wheel 
could pull away from your hands unless you have a 
firm hold. 
2.2.3 – Stopping 
Push the brake pedal down gradually. The amount 
of brake pressure you need to stop the vehicle will 
depend on the speed of the vehicle and how quickly 
you need to stop. Control the pressure so the 
vehicle comes to a smooth, safe stop. If you have a 
manual transmission, push the clutch in when the 
engine is close to idle. 
2.2.4 – Backing Safely 
Because you cannot see everything behind your 
vehicle, backing is always dangerous. Avoid 
backing whenever you can. When you park, try to 
park so you will be able to pull forward when you 
leave. When you have to back, here are a few 
simple safety rules: 
Start in the proper position. 
Look at your path. 
Use mirrors on both sides. 
Back slowly. 
Back and turn toward the driver's side whenever 
possible. 
Use a helper whenever possible. 
These rules are discussed in turn below. 
Start in the Proper Position. Put the vehicle in the 
best position to allow you to back safely. This 
position will depend on the type of backing to be 
done. 
Look at Your Path. Look at your line of travel 
before you begin. Get out and walk around the 
vehicle. Check your clearance to the sides and 
overhead, in and near the path your vehicle will 
take. 
Use Mirrors on Both Sides. Check the outside 
mirrors on both sides frequently. Get out of the 
vehicle and check your path if you are unsure. 
Back Slowly. Always back as slowly as possible. 
Use the lowest reverse gear. That way you can 
more easily correct any steering errors. You also 
can stop quickly if necessary. 
Back and Turn Toward the Driver's Side. Back to 
the driver's side so that you can see better. Backing 
toward the right side is very dangerous because you 
can't see as well. If you back and turn toward the 
driver's side, you can watch the rear of your vehicle 
by looking out the side window. Use driver-side 
backing--even if it means going around the block to 
put your vehicle in this position. The added safety is 
worth it. 
Use a Helper. Use a helper when you can. There 
are blind spots you can't see. That's why a helper is 
important. The helper should stand near the back of 
your vehicle where you can see the helper. Before 
you begin backing, work out a set of hand signals 
that you both understand. Agree on a signal for 
"stop." 
--- PAGE 36 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-9  
Version: July 2017 
 
2.3 – Shifting Gears 
Correct shifting of gears is important. If you can't get 
your vehicle into the right gear while driving, you will 
have less control. 
 
2.3.1 – Manual Transmissions 
Basic Method for Shifting Up.  Most heavy 
vehicles with unsynchronized manual transmissions 
require double clutching to change gears.  If 
equipped with a synchronized manual transmission, 
double clutching is NOT required This is the basic 
method: 
Release accelerator, push in clutch and shift to 
neutral at the same time. 
Release clutch. 
Let engine and gears slow down to the rpm 
required for the next gear (this takes practice). 
Push in clutch and shift to the higher gear at the 
same time. 
Release clutch and press accelerator at the same 
time. 
 
Shifting gears using double clutching requires 
practice.  If you remain too long in neutral, you may 
have difficulty putting the vehicle into the next gear. 
If so, don't try to force it. Return to neutral, release 
clutch, increase engine speed to match road speed, 
and try again. 
 
Knowing When to Shift Up. There are two ways of 
knowing when to shift: 
 
Use Engine Speed (rpm).  Study the driver's 
manual for your vehicle and learn the operating rpm 
range. Watch your tachometer, and shift up when 
your engine reaches the top of the ra nge. (Some 
newer vehicles use "progressive" shifting:  the rpm 
at which you shift becomes higher as you move up 
in the gears. Find out what's right for the vehicle you 
will operate.) 
 
Use Road Speed (mph). Learn what speeds each 
gear is good for. Then, by using the speedometer, 
you'll know when to shift up. 
With either method, you may learn to use engine 
sounds to know when to shift. 
Basic Procedures for Shifting Down 
Release accelerator, push in clutch, and shift to 
neutral at the same time. 
Release clutch. 
Press accelerator, increase engine and gear speed 
to the rpm required in the lower gear. 
Push in clutch and shift to lower gear at the same 
time. 
Release clutch and press accelerator at the same 
time. 
Downshifting, like upshifting, requires knowing 
when to shift. Use either the tachometer or the 
speedometer and downshift at the right rpm or 
road speed. 
 
Special conditions where you should downshift 
are: 
Before Starting Down a Hill.  Slow down and shift 
down to a speed that you can control without using 
the brakes hard. Otherwise the brakes can overheat 
and lose their braking power. 
 
Downshift before starting down the hill. Make sure 
you are in a low enough gear, usually lower than the 
gear required to climb the same hill. 
 
Before Entering a Curve.  Slow down  to a safe 
speed, and downshift to the right gear before 
entering the curve. This lets you use some power 
through the curve to help the vehicle be more stable 
while turning. It also allows you to speed up as soon 
as you are out of the curve. 
 
2.3.2 – Multi-speed Rear Axles and Auxiliary 
Transmissions 
Multi-speed rear axles and auxiliary transmissions 
are used on many vehicles to provide extra gears. 
You usually control them by a selector knob or 
switch on the gearshift lever of the main 
transmission. There are many different shift 
patterns. Learn the right way to shift gears in the 
vehicle you will drive. 
2.3.3 – Automatic Transmissions 
Some vehicles have automatic transmissions. You 
can select a low range to get greater engine braking 
when going down grades. The lower ranges prevent 
the transmission from shifting up beyond the 
selected gear (unless the governor rpm is 
exceeded). It is very important to use this braking 
effect when going down grades. 
2.3.4 – Retarders 
Some vehicles have "retarders." Retarders  help 
slow a vehicle, reducing the need for using your 
brakes. They reduce brake wear and give you 
another way to slow down. There are four basic 
types of retarders (exhaust, engine, hydraulic, and 
electric). All retarders can be turned on or off by the 
driver. On some vehicles the retarding power can be 
adjusted. When turned "on," retarders apply their 
braking power (to the drive wheels only) whenever 
you let up on the accelerator pedal all the way. 
--- PAGE 37 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-10 
Version: July 2017 
Because these devices can be noisy, be sure you 
know where their use is permitted. 
Caution. When your drive wheels have poor 
traction, the retarder may cause them to skid. 
Therefore, you should turn the retarder off 
whenever the road is wet, icy, or snow covered. 
Subsections 2.2 and 2.3 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. Why should you back toward the driver's
side?
2. If stopped on a hill, how can you start
moving without rolling back?
3. When backing, why is it important to use a
helper?
4. What's the most important hand signal that
you and the helper should agree on?
5. What are the two special conditions where
you should downshift?
6. When should you downshift automatic
transmissions?
7. Retarders keep you from skidding when the
road is slippery. True or False?
8. What are the two ways to know when to
shift?
These questions may be on the test. If you can't 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.2 and 2.3. 
2.4 – Seeing 
To be a safe driver you need to know what's going 
on all around your vehicle. Not looking properly is a 
major cause of accidents. 
2.4.1 – Seeing Ahead 
All drivers look ahead; but many don't look far 
enough ahead. 
Importance of Looking Far Enough Ahead. 
Because stopping or changing lanes can take a lot 
of distance, knowing what the traffic is doing on all 
sides of you is very important. You need to look well 
ahead to make sure you have room to make these 
moves safely. 
How Far Ahead to Look. Most good drivers look at 
least 12 to 15 seconds ahead. That means looking 
ahead the distance you will travel in 12 to 15 
seconds. At lower speeds, that's about one block. 
At highway speeds it's about a quarter of a mile. If 
you're not looking that far ahead, you may have to 
stop too quickly or make quick lane changes. 
Looking 12 to 15 seconds ahead doesn't mean not 
paying attention to things that are closer. Good 
drivers shift their attention back and forth, near and 
far. Figure 2.6 illustrates how far to look ahead. 
     Figure 2.6 
Look for Traffic. Look for vehicles coming onto the 
highway, into your lane, or turning. Watch for brake 
lights from slowing vehicles. By seeing these things 
far enough ahead, you can change your speed, or 
change lanes if necessary to avoid a problem.  If a 
traffic light has been green for a long time it will 
probably change before you get there.  Start slowing 
down and be ready to stop. 
2.4.2 – Seeing to the Sides and Rear 
It's important to know what's going on behind and to 
the sides. Check your mirrors regularly. Check more 
often in special situations. 
Mirror Adjustment. Mirror adjustment should be 
checked prior to the start of any trip and can only be 
checked accurately when the trailer(s) are straight. 
You should check and adjust each mirror to show 
some part of the vehicle. This will give you a 
reference point for judging the position of the other 
images. 
Regular Checks. You need to make regular checks 
of your mirrors to be aware of traffic and to check 
your vehicle. 
Traffic. Check your mirrors for vehicles on either 
side and in back of you. In an emergency, you may 
need to know whether you can make a quick lane 
change. Use your mirrors to spot overtaking 
vehicles. There are "blind spots" that your mirrors 
cannot show you. Check your mirrors regularly to 
know where other vehicles are around you, and to 
see if they move into your blind spots. 
Check Your Vehicle. Use the mirrors to keep an 
eye on your tires. It's one way to spot a tire fire. If 
you're carrying open cargo, you can use the mirrors 
to check it. Look for loose straps, ropes, or chains. 
Watch for a flapping or ballooning tarp.  

--- PAGE 38 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-11 
Version: July 2017 
Special Situations. Special situations require more 
than regular mirror checks. These are lane 
changes, turns, merges, and tight maneuvers. 
Lane Changes. You need to check your mirrors to 
make sure no one is alongside you or about to pass 
you. Check your mirrors: 
Before you change lanes to make sure there is 
enough room. 
After you have signaled, to check that no one has 
moved into your blind spot. 
Right after you start the lane change, to double-
check that your path is clear. 
After you complete the lane change. 
Turns. In turns, check your mirrors to make sure the 
rear of your vehicle will not hit anything. 
Merges. When merging, use your mirrors to make 
sure the gap in traffic is large enough for you to 
enter safely. 
Tight Maneuvers. Any time you are driving in close 
quarters, check your mirrors often. Make sure you 
have enough clearance. 
How to Use Mirrors. Use mirrors correctly by 
checking them quickly and understanding what you 
see. 
When you use your mirrors while driving on the 
road, check quickly. Look back and forth between 
the mirrors and the road ahead. Don't focus on the 
mirrors for too long. Otherwise, you will travel quite 
a distance without knowing what's happening 
ahead. 
Many large vehicles have curved (convex, 
"fisheye," "spot," "bug-eye") mirrors that show a 
wider area than flat mirrors. This is often helpful. 
But everything appears smaller in a convex mirror 
than it would if you were looking at it directly. 
Things also seem farther away than they really are. 
It's important to realize this and to allow for it. 
Figure 2.7 shows the field of vision using a convex 
mirror. 
2.5 – Communicating 
2.5.1 – Signal Your Intentions 
Other drivers can't know what you are going to do 
until you tell them. 
Signaling what you intend to do is important for 
safety. Here are some general rules for signaling. 
Figure 2.7 
Turns. There are three good rules for using turn 
signals: 
Signal early. Signal well before you turn. It is the 
best way to keep others from trying to pass you. 
Signal continuously. You need both hands on the 
wheel to turn safely. Don't cancel the signal until 
you have completed the turn. 
Cancel your signal. Don't forget to turn off your turn 
signal after you've turned (if you don't have self-
canceling signals). 
Lane Changes. Put your turn signal on before 
changing lanes. Change lanes slowly and smoothly. 
That way a driver you didn't see may have a chance 
to honk his/her horn, or avoid your vehicle. 
Slowing Down. Warn drivers behind you when you 
see you'll need to slow down. A few light taps on the 
brake pedal -- enough to flash the brake lights -- 
should warn following drivers. Use the four-way 
emergency flashers for times when you are driving 
very slowly or are stopped. Warn other drivers in 
any of the following situations: 
Trouble Ahead. 
The size of your vehicle may 
make it hard for drivers behind you to see hazards 
ahead. If you see a hazard that will require slowing 
down, warn the drivers behind by flashing your 
brake lights. 

--- PAGE 39 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-12 
Version: July 2017 
Tight Turns. Most car drivers don't know how 
slowly you have to go to make a tight turn in a 
large vehicle. Give drivers behind you warning by 
braking early and slowing gradually. 
Stopping on the Road. Truck and bus drivers 
sometimes stop in the roadway to unload cargo or 
passengers, or to stop at a railroad crossing. Warn 
following drivers by flashing your brake lights. 
Don't stop suddenly. 
Driving Slowly. Drivers often do not realize how 
fast they are catching up to a slow vehicle until 
they are very close. If you must drive slowly, alert 
following drivers by turning on your emergency 
flashers if it is legal. (Laws regarding the use of 
flashers differ from one state to another. Check the 
laws of the states where you will drive.) 
Don't Direct Traffic. Some drivers try to help out 
others by signaling when it is safe to pass. You 
should not do this. You could cause an accident. 
You could be blamed and it could cost you many 
thousands of dollars. 
2.5.2 – Communicating Your Presence 
Other drivers may not notice your vehicle even 
when it's in plain sight. To help prevent accidents, 
let them know you're there. 
When Passing. Whenever you are about to pass a 
vehicle, pedestrian, or bicyclist, assume they don't 
see you. They could suddenly move in front of you. 
When it is legal, tap the horn lightly or, at night, flash 
your lights from low to high beam and back. And, 
drive carefully enough to avoid a crash even if they 
don't see or hear you. 
When It's Hard to See. At dawn, dusk, in rain, or 
snow, you need to make yourself easier to see. If 
you are having trouble seeing other vehicles, other 
drivers will have trouble seeing you. Turn on your 
lights. Use the headlights, not just the identification 
or clearance lights. Use the low beams; high beams 
can bother people in the daytime as well as at night. 
When Parked at the Side of the Road. When you 
pull off the road and stop, be sure to turn on the four-
way emergency flashers. This is important at night.
Don't trust the taillights to give warning. Drivers 
have crashed into the rear of a parked vehicle 
because they thought it was moving normally. 
If you must stop on a road or the shoulder of any 
road, you must put out your emergency warning 
devices within ten minutes. Place your warning 
devices at the following locations: 
If you mus t stop on or by a one-way or divided 
highway, place warning devices 1 0 feet, 100 feet, 
and 200 feet toward the approaching traffic. See 
Figure 2.8. 
Figure 2.8 

--- PAGE 40 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-13  
Version: July 2017 
 
If you stop on a two-lane road carrying traffic in both 
directions or on an undivided highway, place 
warning devices within 10 feet of the front or rear 
corners to mark the l ocation of the vehicle and 100 
feet behind and ahead of the vehicle, on the 
shoulder or in the lane you stopped in. See Figure 
2.9. 
 
 
Figure 2.9 
 
Back beyond any hill, curve, or other obstruction 
that prevents other drivers from seeing the vehicle 
within 500 feet. If line of sight view is obstructed due 
to hill or curve, move the rear-most triangle to  
a point back down the road so warning is provided. 
See Figure 2.10.  
 
 
Figure 2.10 
 
When putting out the triangles, hold them between 
yourself and the onco ming traffic for your own 
safety. (So other drivers can see you.) 
 
Use Your Horn When Needed.  Your horn can let 
others know you're there. It can help to avoid a 
crash. Use your horn when needed. However, it can 
startle others and could be dangerous when us ed 
unnecessarily. 
 
2.6 – Controlling Speed 
 
Driving too fast is a major cause of fatal crashes. 
You must adjust your speed depending on driving 
conditions. These include traction, curves, visibility, 
traffic and hills. 
 
2.6.1 – Stopping Distance 
 
Perception Distance + Reaction Distance + Braking 
Distance = Total Stopping Distance 
 
Perception distance.   The distance your vehicle 
travels, in ideal conditions; from the time your eyes 
see a hazard until your brain recognizes it.  Keep in 
mind certain mental and  physical conditions can 
affect your perception distance.  It can be affected 
greatly depending on visibility and the hazard itself.  
The average perception time for an alert driver is 1¾ 

--- PAGE 41 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-14  
Version: July 2017 
 
seconds.  At 55 mph this accounts for 142 feet 
traveled.  
Reaction distance.   The distance you will continue 
to travel, in ideal conditions; before you physically 
hit the brakes, in response to a hazard seen ahead.  
The average driver has a reaction time of ¾ second 
to 1 second.  At 55 mph this accounts for 6 1 feet 
traveled.    
Braking distance.  The distance your vehicle will 
travel, in ideal conditions; while you are braking.  At 
55 mph on dry pavement with good brakes, it can 
take about 216 feet.   
Total stopping distance .  The total minimum 
distance your vehicle has tr aveled, in ideal 
conditions; with everything considered, including 
perception distance, reaction distance and braking 
distance, until you can bring your vehicle to a 
complete stop.  At 55 mph, your vehicle will travel a 
minimum of 419 feet.  See Figure 2.11. 
 
Figure 2.11 
The Effect of Speed on Stopping Distance. 
The faster you drive, the greater the impact or 
striking power of your vehicle.  When you double 
your speed from 20 to 40 mph the impact is 4 times 
greater.  The braking distance is also 4 times longer.  
Triple the speed from 20 to 60 mph and the impact 
and braking distance is 9 times greater.  At 60 mph, 
your stopping distance is greater than th e length of 
a football field.  Increase the speed to 80 mph and 
the impact and braking distance are 16 ti mes 
greater than at 20 mph.  High speeds greatly 
increase the severity of crashes and stopping 
distances.  By slowing down, you can reduce 
braking distance. 
 
The Effect of Vehicle Weight on Stopping 
Distance. The heavier the vehicle, the more work 
the brakes must do to stop it, and the more heat they 
absorb. But the brakes, tires, springs, and shock 
absorbers on heavy vehicles are designed to work 
best when the vehicle is fully loaded. Empty trucks 
require greater stopping distances because an 
empty vehicle has less traction. 
 
2.6.2 – Matching Speed to the Road Surface 
You can't steer or brake a vehicle unless you have 
traction. Traction is friction between the tires and the 
road. There are some road conditions that reduce 
traction and call for lower speeds. 
Slippery Surfaces. It will take longer to stop, and it 
will be harder to turn without skidding, when the 
road is slippery. Wet roads can double stopping 
distance. You must drive slower to be able to stop 
in the same distance as on a dry road. Reduce 
speed by about one -third (e.g., slow from 55 to 
about 35 mph) on a wet road. On packed snow, 
reduce speed by a half, or more. If the surface is icy, 
reduce speed to a crawl and stop driving as soon as 
you can safely do so. 
Identifying Slippery Surfaces.  Sometimes it's 
hard to know if the road is slippery. Here are some 
signs of slippery roads: 
Shaded Areas. Shady parts of the road will remain 
icy and slippery long after open areas have melted. 
Bridges. When the temperature drops, bridges will 
freeze before the road will. Be especially careful 
when the temperature is close to 32 degrees 
Fahrenheit. 
Melting Ice. Slight melting will make ice wet. Wet 
ice is much more slippery than ice that is not wet. 
Black Ice. Black ice is a thin layer that is clear 
enough that you can see the road underneath it. It 
makes the road look wet. Any time the temperature 
is below freezing and the road looks wet, watch out 
for black ice. 
Vehicle Icing. An easy way to check for ice is to 
open the window and feel the front of the mirror, 
mirror support, or antenna. If there's ice on these, 
the road surface is probably starting to ice up. 
Just After Rain Begins. Right after it starts to 
rain, the water mixes with oil left on the road by 
vehicles. This makes the road very slippery. If the 
rain continues, it will wash the oil away.  
Hydroplaning. In some weather, water or slush 
collects on the road. When this happens, your 
vehicle can hydroplane. It's like water skiing--the 
tires lose their contact with the road and have little 
or no traction. You may not be able to steer or 
brake. You can regain control by releasing the 

--- PAGE 42 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-15 
Version: July 2017 
accelerator and pushing in the clutch. This will slow 
your vehicle and let the wheels turn freely. If the 
vehicle is hydroplaning, do not use the brakes to 
slow down. If the drive wheels start to skid, push in 
the clutch to let them turn freely. 
It does not take a lot of water to cause hydroplaning. 
Hydroplaning can occur at speeds as low as 30 mph 
if there is a lot of water. Hydroplaning is more likely 
if tire pressure is low, or the tread is worn. (The 
grooves in a tire carry away the water; if they aren't 
deep, they don't work well.)  
Road surfaces where water can collect can create 
conditions that cause a vehicle to hydroplane. 
Watch for clear reflections, tire splashes, and 
raindrops on the road. These are indications of 
standing water.  
2.6.3 – Speed and Curves 
Drivers must adjust their speed for curves in the 
road. If you take a curve too fast, two things can 
happen. The tires can lose their traction and 
continue straight ahead, so you skid off the road. Or, 
the tires may keep their traction and the vehicle rolls 
over. Tests have shown that trucks with a high 
center of gravity can roll over at the posted speed 
limit for a curve. 
Slow to a safe speed before you enter a curve. 
Braking in a curve is dangerous because it is easier 
to lock the wheels and cause a skid. Slow down as 
needed. Don't ever exceed the posted speed limit 
for the curve. Be in a gear that will let you accelerate 
slightly in the curve. This will help you keep control. 
2.6.4 – Speed and Distance Ahead 
You should always be able to stop within the 
distance you can see ahead. Fog, rain, or other 
conditions may require that you slowdown to be 
able to stop in the distance you can see. At night, 
you can't see as far with low beams as you can with 
high beams. When you must use low beams, slow 
down. 
2.6.5 – Speed and Traffic Flow 
When you're driving in heavy traffic, the safest 
speed is the speed of other vehicles. Vehicles going 
the same direction at the same speed are not likely 
to run into one another. In many states, speed limits 
are lower for trucks and buses than for cars. It can 
vary as much as 15 mph. Use extra caution when 
you change lanes or pass on these roadways. Drive 
at the speed of the traffic, if you can without going 
at an illegal or unsafe speed. Keep a safe following 
distance. 
The main reason drivers exceed speed limits is to 
save time. But, anyone trying to drive faster than the 
speed of traffic will not be able to save much time. 
The risks involved are not worth it. If you go faster 
than the speed of other traffic, you'll have to keep 
passing other vehicles. This increases the chance 
of a crash, and it is more tiring. Fatigue increases 
the chance of a crash. Going with the flow of traffic 
is safer and easier. 
2.6.6 – Speed on Downgrades 
Your vehicle's speed will increase on downgrades 
because of gravity. Your most important objective is 
to select and maintain a speed that is not too fast for 
the: 
Total weight of the vehicle and cargo. 
Length of the grade. 
Steepness of the grade. 
Road conditions. 
Weather. 
If a speed limit is posted, or there is a sign indicating 
"Maximum Safe Speed," never exceed the speed 
shown. Also, look for and heed warning signs 
indicating the length and steepness of the grade. 
You must use the braking effect of the engine as the 
principal way of controlling your speed on 
downgrades. The braking effect of the engine is 
greatest when it is near the governed rpms and the 
transmission is in the lower gears. Save your brakes 
so you will be able to slow or stop as required by 
road and traffic conditions. Shift your transmission 
to a low gear before starting down the grade and 
use the proper braking techniques. Please read 
carefully the section on going down long, steep 
downgrades safely in "Mountain Driving." 
2.6.7 – Roadway Work Zones 
Speeding traffic is the number one cause of injury 
and death in roadway work zones. Observe the 
posted speed limits at all times when approaching 
and driving through a work zone. Watch your 
speedometer, and don’t allow your speed to creep
up as you drive through long sections of road 
construction. Decrease your speed for adverse 
weather or road conditions. Decrease your speed 
even further when a worker is close to the roadway. 
Subsections 2.4, 2.5, and 2.6 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. How far ahead does the manual say you
should look?
2. What are two main things to look for ahead?
--- PAGE 43 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-16  
Version: July 2017 
 
3. What's your most important way to see the 
sides and rear of your vehicle? 
4. What does "communicating" mean in safe 
driving? 
5. Where should you place reflectors when 
stopped on a divided highway? 
6. What three things add up to total stopping 
distance? 
7. If you go twice as fast, will your stopping 
distance increase by two or four times? 
8. Empty trucks have the best braking. True or 
False? 
9. What is hydroplaning? 
10. What is "black ice”? 
These questions may be on the test. If you can't 
answer them all, re -read subsections 2.4, 2.5, and 
2.6. 
 
 
2.7 – Managing Space 
 
To be a safe driver, you need space all around your 
vehicle. When things go wrong, space gives you 
time to think and to take action. 
 
To have space available when something goes 
wrong, you need to manage space. While this is true 
for all drivers, it is very important for large vehicles. 
They take up more space and they require more 
space for stopping and turning. 
2.7.1 – Space Ahead 
 
Of all the space around your vehicle, it is the area 
ahead of the vehicle--the space you're driving into -
-that is most important. 
 
The Need for Space Ahead. You need space 
ahead in case you must suddenly stop. According 
to acc ident reports, the vehicle that trucks and 
buses most often run into is the one in front of them. 
The most frequent cause is following too closely. 
Remember, if the vehicle ahead of you is smaller 
than yours, it can probably stop faster than you can. 
You may crash if you are following too closely. 
How Much Space?  How much space should you 
keep in front of you? One good rule says you need 
at least one second for each 10 feet of vehicle 
length at speeds below 40 mph. At greater speeds, 
you must add 1 second f or safety. For example, if 
you are driving a 40 -foot vehicle, you should leave 
4 seconds between you and the vehicle ahead. In a 
60-foot rig, you'll need 6 seconds. Over 40 mph, 
you'd need 5 seconds for a 40 -foot vehicle and 7 
seconds for a 60-foot vehicle. See Figure 2.12. 
 
To know how much space you have, wait until the 
vehicle ahead passes a shadow on the road, a 
pavement marking, or some other clear landmark. 
Then count off the seconds like this: "one thousand- 
and-one, one thousand -and-two" and so on, until 
you reach the same spot. Compare your count with 
the rule of one second for every ten feet of length.  
If you are driving a 40 -foot truck and only counted 
up to 2 seconds, you're too close. Drop back a little 
and count again until you have 4 seconds of 
following distance (or 5 seconds, if you're going over 
40 mph). After a little practice, you will know how far 
back you should be. Remember to add 1 second for 
speeds above 40 mph. Also remember that when 
the road is slippery, you need much more space t o 
stop. 
 
 
Figure 2.12 
 
2.7.2 – Space Behind 
 
You can't stop others from following you too closely. 
But there are things you can do to make it safer. 
 
Stay to the Right.  Heavy vehicles are often 
tailgated when they can't keep up with the speed of 
traffic. This often happens when you're going uphill. 
If a heavy load is slowing you down, stay in the right 
lane if you can. Going uphill, you should not pass 

--- PAGE 44 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-17 
Version: July 2017 
another slow vehicle unless you can get around 
quickly and safely. 
Dealing with Tailgaters Safely. In a large vehicle, 
it's often hard to see whether a vehicle is close 
behind you. You may be tailgated: 
When you are traveling slowly. Drivers trapped 
behind slow vehicles often follow closely. 
In bad weather. Many car drivers follow large 
vehicles closely during bad weather, especially 
when it is hard to see the road ahead. 
If you find yourself being tailgated, here are some 
things you can do to reduce the chances of a crash: 
Avoid quick changes. If you have to slow down or 
turn, signal early, and reduce speed very gradually. 
Increase your following distance. Opening up 
room in front of you will help you to avoid having to 
make sudden speed or direction changes. It also 
makes it easier for the tailgater to get around you. 
Don't speed up. It's safer to be tailgated at a low 
speed than a high speed. 
Avoid tricks. Don't turn on your taillights or flash 
your brake lights. Follow the suggestions above. 
2.7.3 – Space to the Sides 
Commercial vehicles are often wide and take up 
most of a lane. Safe drivers will manage what little 
space they have. You can do this by keeping your 
vehicle centered in your lane, and avoid driving 
alongside others. 
Staying Centered in a Lane. You need to keep 
your vehicle centered in the lane to keep safe 
clearance on either side. If your vehicle is wide, you 
have little room to spare. 
Traveling Next to Others. There are two dangers 
in traveling alongside other vehicles: 
Another driver may change lanes suddenly and 
turn into you. 
You may be trapped when you need to change 
lanes. 
Find an open spot where you aren't near other 
traffic. When traffic is heavy, it may be hard to find 
an open spot. If you must travel near other vehicles, 
try to keep as much space as possible between you 
and them. Also, drop back or pull forward so that 
you are sure the other driver can see you. 
Strong Winds. Strong winds make it difficult to stay 
in your lane. The problem is usually worse for lighter 
vehicles. This problem can be especially bad 
coming out of tunnels. Don't drive alongside others 
if you can avoid it. 
2.7.4 – Space Overhead 
Hitting overhead objects is a danger. Make sure you 
always have overhead clearance. 
Don't assume that the heights posted at bridges 
and overpasses are correct. Re-paving or packed 
snow may have reduced the clearances since the 
heights were posted. 
The weight of a cargo van changes its height. An 
empty van is higher than a loaded one. That you 
got under a bridge when you were loaded does not 
mean that you can do it when you are empty. 
If you doubt you have safe space to pass under an 
object, go slowly. If you aren't sure you can make 
it, take another route. Warnings are often posted 
on low bridges or underpasses, but sometimes 
they are not. 
Some roads can cause a vehicle to tilt. There can 
be a problem clearing objects along the edge of 
the road, such as signs, trees, or bridge supports. 
Where this is a problem, drive a little closer to the 
center of the road. 
Before you back into an area, get out and check 
for overhanging objects such as trees, branches, 
or electric wires. It's easy to miss seeing them 
while you are backing. (Also check for other 
hazards at the same time.) 
2.7.5 – Space Below 
Many drivers forget about the space under their 
vehicles. That space can be very small when a 
vehicle is heavily loaded. This is often a problem on 
dirt roads and in unpaved yards. Don't take a 
chance on getting hung up. Drainage channels 
across roads can cause the ends of some vehicles 
to drag. Cross such depressions carefully. 
Railroad tracks can also cause problems, 
particularly when pulling trailers with a low 
underneath clearance. Don’t take a chance on 
getting hung up halfway across. 
2.7.6 – Space for Turns 
The space around a truck or bus is important in 
turns. Because of wide turning and off-tracking, 
large vehicles can hit other vehicles or objects 
during turns. 
Right Turns. Here are some rules to help prevent 
right-turn crashes: 
Turn slowly to give yourself and others more time 
to avoid problems. 
--- PAGE 45 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-18 
Version: July 2017 
If you are driving a truck or bus that cannot make 
the right turn without swinging into another lane, 
turn wide as you complete the turn. Keep the rear 
of your vehicle close to the curb. This will stop 
other drivers from passing you on the right. 
Don't turn wide to the left as you start the turn. A 
following driver may think you are turning left and 
try to pass you on the right. You may crash into the 
other vehicle as you complete your turn. 
If you must cross into the oncoming lane to make a 
turn, watch out for vehicles coming toward you. 
Give them room to go by or to stop. However, don't 
back up for them, because you might hit someone 
behind you. See Figure 2.13. 
Figure 2.13 
Left Turns. On a left turn, make sure you have 
reached the center of the intersection before you 
start the left turn. If you turn too soon, the left side 
of your vehicle may hit another vehicle because of 
off-tracking. 
If there are two turning lanes, always take the right 
turn lane. Don't start in the inside lane because you 
may have to swing right to make the turn. Drivers on 
your left can be more readily seen. See Figure 2.14. 
Figure 2.14 
2.7.7 – Space Needed to Cross or Enter Traffic 
Be aware of the size and weight of your vehicle 
when you cross or enter traffic. Here are some 
important things to keep in mind. 
Because of slow acceleration and the space large 
vehicles require, you may need a much larger gap 
to enter traffic than you would in a car. 
Acceleration varies with the load. Allow more room 
if your vehicle is heavily loaded. 
Before you start across a road, make sure you can 
get all the way across before traffic reaches you. 
2.8 – Seeing Hazards 
2.8.1 – Importance of Seeing Hazards 
What Is a Hazard? A hazard is any road condition 
or other road user (driver, bicyclist, pedestrian) that 
is a possible danger. For example, a car in front of 
you is headed toward the freeway exit, but his brake 
lights come on and he begins braking hard. This 
could mean that the driver is uncertain about taking 
the off ramp. He might suddenly return to the 
highway. This car is a hazard. If the driver of the car 
cuts in front of you, it is no longer just a hazard; it is 
an emergency. 
Seeing Hazards Lets You Be Prepared. You will 
have more time to act if you see hazards before they 
become emergencies. In the example above, you 
might make a lane change or slow down to prevent 
a crash if the car suddenly cuts in front of you. 
Seeing this hazard gives you time to check your 
mirrors and signal a lane change. Being prepared 
reduces the danger. A driver who did not see the 
hazard until the slow car pulled back on the highway 
in front of him would have to do something very 
suddenly. Sudden braking or a quick lane change is 
much more likely to lead to a crash. 
Learning to See Hazards. There are often clues 
that will help you see hazards. The more you drive, 
the better you can learn to see hazards. This section 
will talk about hazards that you should be aware of. 
2.8.2 – Hazardous Roads 
Move-Over Laws 
The incidents of law enforcement officers, 
emergency medical services, fire department 
personnel and people working on the road are 
being struck while performing duties at the 
roadside are increasing at a frightening pace.  To 
lessen the problem, move-over laws have been 
enacted, which require drivers to slow and change 
lanes when approaching a roadside incident or 
emergency vehicle.  Signs are posted on roadways 
in states that have such laws.   

--- PAGE 46 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-19 
Version: July 2017 
When approaching an authorized emergency 
vehicle stopped on the roadside or a work zone, 
you should proceed with caution by slowing and 
yielding the right-of-way by making a lane change 
into a lane not next to that of the authorized 
emergency vehicle or work zone if safety and 
traffic conditions permit.  If a lane change is 
unsafe, slow down and proceed with caution while 
maintaining a safe speed for traffic conditions. 
Slow down and be very careful if you see any of the 
following road hazards. 
Work Zones. When people are working on the road, 
it is a hazard. There may be narrower lanes, sharp 
turns, or uneven surfaces. Other drivers are often 
distracted and drive unsafely. Workers and 
construction vehicles may get in the way. Drive 
slowly and carefully near work zones. Use your four-
way flashers or brake lights to warn drivers behind 
you. 
Drop Off. Sometimes the pavement drops off 
sharply near the edge of the road. Driving too near 
the edge can tilt your vehicle toward the side of the 
road. This can cause the top of your vehicle to hit 
roadside objects (signs, tree limbs). Also, it can be 
hard to steer as you cross the drop off, going off the 
road, or coming back on. 
Foreign Objects. Things that have fallen on the 
road can be hazards. They can be a danger to your 
tires and wheel rims. They can damage electrical 
and brake lines. They can be caught between dual 
tires and cause severe damage. Some obstacles 
that appear to be harmless can be very dangerous. 
For example, cardboard boxes may be empty, but 
they may also contain some solid or heavy material 
capable of causing damage. The same is true of 
paper and cloth sacks. It is important to remain alert 
for objects of all sorts, so you can see them early 
enough to avoid them without making sudden, 
unsafe moves. 
Off Ramps/On Ramps. Freeway and turnpike exits 
can be particularly dangerous for commercial 
vehicles. Off ramps and on ramps often have speed 
limit signs posted. Remember, these speeds may 
be safe for automobiles, but may not be safe for 
larger vehicles or heavily loaded vehicles. Exits that 
go downhill and turn at the same time can be 
especially dangerous. The downgrade makes it 
difficult to reduce speed. Braking and turning at the 
same time can be a dangerous practice. Make sure 
you are going slowly enough before you get on the 
curved part of an off ramp or on ramp. 
2.8.3 – Drivers Who Are Hazards 
In order to protect yourself and others, you must 
know when other drivers may do something 
hazardous. Some clues to this type of hazard are 
discussed below. 
Blocked Vision. People who can't see others are a 
very dangerous hazard. Be alert for drivers whose 
vision is blocked. Vans, loaded station wagons, and 
cars with the rear window blocked are examples. 
Rental trucks should be watched carefully. Their 
drivers are often not used to the limited vision they 
have to the sides and rear of the truck. In winter, 
vehicles with frosted, ice-covered, or snow-covered 
windows are hazards. 
Vehicles may be partly hidden by blind intersections 
or alleys. If you only can see the rear or front end of 
a vehicle but not the driver, then he or she can't see 
you. Be alert because he/she may back out or enter 
into your lane. Always be prepared to stop. 
Delivery Trucks Can Present a Hazard. Packages 
or vehicle doors often block the driver’s vision. 
Drivers of step vans, postal vehicles, and local 
delivery vehicles often are in a hurry and may 
suddenly step out of their vehicle or drive their 
vehicle into the traffic lane. 
Parked Vehicles Can Be Hazards,  especially 
when people start to get out of them. Or, they may 
suddenly start up and drive into your way. Watch for 
movement inside the vehicle or movement of the 
vehicle itself that shows people are inside. Watch 
for brake lights or backup lights, exhaust, and other 
clues that a driver is about to move. 
Be careful of a stopped bus. Passengers may cross 
in front of or behind the bus, and they often can't see 
you. 
Pedestrians and Bicyclists Can Also Be 
Hazards. Walkers, joggers, and bicyclists may be 
on the road with their back to the traffic, so they can't 
see you. Sometimes they wear portable stereos 
with headsets, so they can't hear you either. This 
can be dangerous. On rainy days, pedestrians may 
not see you because of hats or umbrellas. They may 
be hurrying to get out of the rain and may not pay 
attention to the traffic. 
Distractions. People who are distracted are 
hazards. Watch for where they are looking. If they 
are looking elsewhere, they can't see you. But be 
alert even when they are looking at you. They may 
believe that they have the right of way. 
--- PAGE 47 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-20  
Version: July 2017 
 
Children. Children tend to act quickly without 
checking traffic. Children playing with one another 
may not look for traffic and are a serious hazard. 
 
Talkers. Drivers or pedestrian s talking to one 
another may not be paying close attention to the 
traffic. 
 
Workers. People working on or near the roadway 
are a hazard clue. The work creates a distraction for 
other drivers and the workers themselves may not 
see you. 
 
Ice Cream Trucks. Someone selling ice cream is a 
hazard clue. Children may be nearby and may not 
see you. 
 
Disabled Vehicles. Drivers changing a tire or fixing 
an engine often do not pay attention to the danger 
that roadway traffic is to them. They are often 
careless. Jacked up wheels or raised hoods are 
hazard clues. 
 
Accidents. Accidents are particularly hazardous. 
People involved in the accident may not look for 
traffic. Passing drivers tend to look at the accident. 
People often run across the road without looking. 
Vehicles may slow or stop suddenly. 
 
Shoppers. People in and around shopping areas 
are often not watching traffic because they are 
looking for stores or looking into store windows. 
 
Confused Drivers. Confused drivers often change 
direction suddenly or stop without  warning. 
Confusion is common near freeway or turnpike 
interchanges and major intersections. Tourists 
unfamiliar with the area can be very hazardous. 
Clues to tourists include car-top luggage and out-of-
state license plates. Unexpected actions (stopping 
in the middle of a block, changing lanes for no 
apparent reason, backup lights suddenly going on) 
are clues to confusion. Hesitation is another clue, 
including driving very slowly, using brakes often, or 
stopping in the middle of an intersection. You may 
also see drivers who are looking at street signs, 
maps, and house numbers. These drivers may not 
be paying attention to you. 
 
Slow Drivers. Motorists who fail to maintain normal 
speed are hazards. Seeing slow moving vehicles 
early can prevent a crash. Some ve hicles, by their 
nature, are slow and seeing them is a hazard clue 
(mopeds, farm machinery, construction machinery, 
tractors, etc.). Some of these will have the "slow 
moving vehicle" symbol to warn you. This is a red 
triangle with an orange center. Watch for it. 
 
Drivers Signaling a Turn May Be a Hazard. 
Drivers signaling a turn may slow more than 
expected or stop. If they are making a tight turn into 
an alley or driveway, they may go very slowly. If 
pedestrians or other vehicles block them, they may 
have to stop on the roadway. Vehicles turning left 
may have to stop for oncoming vehicles. 
 
Drivers in a Hurry. Drivers may feel your 
commercial vehicle is preventing them from getting 
where they want to go on time. Such drivers may 
pass you without a safe gap in the oncoming traffic, 
cutting too close in front of you. Drivers entering the 
road may pull in front of you in order to avoid being 
stuck behind you, causing you to brake. Be aware 
of this and watch for drivers who are in a hurry. 
 
Impaired Drivers.  Drivers who are sleepy, have 
had too much to drink, are on drugs, or who are ill 
are hazards. Some clues to these drivers are: 
Weaving across the road or drifting from one side 
to another. 
Leaving the road (dropping right wheels onto the 
shoulder, or bumping across a curb in a turn). 
Stopping at the wrong time (stopping at a green 
light, or waiting for too long at a stop). 
Open window in cold weather. 
Speeding up or slowing down suddenly, driving too 
fast or too slow. 
Be alert for drunk drivers and sleepy driv ers late at 
night. 
 
Driver Body Movement as a Clue. Drivers look in 
the direction they are going to turn. You may 
sometimes get a clue from a driver's head and body 
movements that a driver may be going to make a 
turn, even though the turn signals aren't on. Drivers 
making over-the-shoulder checks may be going to 
change lanes. These clues are most easily seen in 
motorcyclists and bicyclists. Watch other road users 
and try to tell whether they might do something 
hazardous. 
 
Conflicts. You are in conflict when  you have to 
change speed and/or direction to avoid hitting 
someone. Conflicts occur at intersections where 
vehicles meet, at merges (such as turnpike on 
ramps) and where there are needed lane changes 
(such as the end of a lane, forcing a move to another 
lane of traffic). Other situations include slow moving 
or stalled traffic in a traffic lane, and accident 
scenes. Watch for other drivers who are in conflict 
because they are a hazard to you. When they react 
to this conflict, they may do something that will  put 
them in conflict with you. 
--- PAGE 48 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
