Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-21 
Version: July 2017 
2.8.4 – Always Have a Plan 
You should always be looking for hazards. Continue 
to learn to see hazards on the road. However, don't 
forget why you are looking for the hazards --they 
may turn into emergencies. You look for the hazards 
in order to have time to plan a way out of any 
emergency. When you see a hazard, think about the 
emergencies that could develop and figure out what 
you would do. Always be prepared to take action 
based on your plans. In this way, you will be a 
prepared, defensive driver who will improve your 
own safety as well as the safety of all road users. 
Subsections 2.7 and 2.8 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. How do you find out how many seconds of
following distance space you have?
2. If you are driving a 30-foot vehicle at 55
mph, how many seconds of following
distance should you allow?
3. You should decrease your following
distance if somebody is following you too
closely. True or False?
4. If you swing wide to the left before turning
right, another driver may try to pass you on
the right. True or False?
5. What is a hazard?
6. Why make emergency plans when you see
a hazard?
These questions may be on the test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.7 and 2.8 
2.9 – Distracted Driving 
A driver distraction is anything that takes your 
attention away from driving. Whenever you are 
driving a vehicle and your full attention is not on the 
driving task, you are putting yourself, your 
passengers, other vehicles, and pedestrians in 
danger. Distracted driving can cause collisions, 
resulting in injury, death or property damage.  
Activities inside of the vehicle that can distract your 
attention include:  talking to passengers; adjusting 
the radio, CD player or climate controls; eating, 
drinking or smoking; reading maps or other 
literature; picking up something that fell; talking on 
a cell phone or CB radio; reading or sending text 
messages; using any type of telematic or electronic  
devices (such as navigation systems, pagers, 
personal digital assistant, computers, etc.); 
daydreaming or being occupied with other mental 
distractions; and many others. 
Possible distractions that could occur outside a 
moving vehicle: outside traffic, vehicles or 
pedestrians; outside events such as police pulling 
someone over or a crash scene; sunlight/sunset; 
objects in roadway; road construction; reading 
billboards or other road advertisements; and many 
others. 
2.9.1 – The Distracted Driving Crash Problem 
The Large Truck Crash Causation Study (LTCCS) 
reported that 8 percent of large-truck crashes 
occurred when Commercial Motor Vehicle (CMV) 
drivers were externally distracted and 2 percent of 
large truck crashes occurred when the driver was 
internally distracted. 
Approximately 5,500 people are killed each year on 
U.S. roadways and an estimated 448,000 are 
injured in motor vehicle crashes involving distracted 
driving (NHTSA Traffic Safety Facts: Distracted 
Driving). 
Research indicates that the burden of talking on a 
cell phone - even if it's hands-free - saps the brain 
of 39% of the energy it would ordinarily devote to 
safe driving.  Drivers who use a hand-held device 
are more likely to get into a crash serious enough to 
cause injury.  (NHTSA distracted driving website, 
www.distraction.gov
). 
2.9.2 – Effects of Distracted Driving 
Effects of distracted driving include slowed 
perception, which may cause you to be delayed in 
perceiving or completely fail to perceive an 
important traffic event; delayed decision making and 
improper action, which can cause you to be delayed 
in taking the proper action or make incorrect inputs 
to the steering, accelerator or brakes. 
2.9.3 – Types of Distractions 
There are many causes of distraction, all with the 
potential to increase risk. 
Physical distraction – one that causes you to take 
your hands off the wheel or eyes off the road, such 
as reaching for an object. 
Mental distraction – activities that take your mind 
away from the road, such as engaging in 
conversation with a passenger or thinking about 
something that happened during the day. 
Both physical and mental distraction  – even 
greater chance a crash could happen, such as 
talking on a cell phone; or sending or reading text 
messages. 
--- PAGE 49 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-22 
Version: July 2017 
2.9.4 – Cell/Mobile Phones 
49 CFR Part 383, 384, 390, 391 and 392 of the 
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations 
(FMCSRs) and the Hazardous Materials 
Regulations (HMR) restricts the use of hand-held 
mobile telephones by drivers of commercial motor 
vehicles (CMVs); and implements new driver 
disqualification sanctions for drivers of CMVs who 
fail to comply with this Federal restriction; or who 
have multiple convictions for violating a State or 
local law or ordinance on motor vehicle traffic 
control that restricts the use of hand-held mobile 
telephones. Additionally, motor carriers are 
prohibited from requiring or allowing drivers of 
CMVs to use hand-held mobile telephones. 
The use of hand-held mobile telephones means, 
‘‘using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone 
to conduct a voice communication; “dialing a mobile 
telephone by pressing more than a single button”; 
or “moving from a seated driving position while 
restrained by a seat belt to reach for a mobile 
telephone”. If you choose to use a mobile phone 
while operating a CMV, you may only use a hands 
free mobile phone that is located close to you and 
that can be operated in compliance with the rule to 
conduct a voice communication. 
Your CDL will be disqualified after two or more 
convictions of any state law on hand-held mobile 
telephone use while operating a CMV. 
Disqualification is 60 days for the second offense 
within 3 years and 120 days for three or more 
offenses within 3 years. In addition, the first and 
each subsequent violation of such a prohibition are 
subject to civil penalties imposed on such drivers, in 
an amount up to $2,750. Motor carriers must not 
allow nor require drivers to use a hand-held mobile 
telephone while driving. Employers may also be 
subject to civil penalties in an amount up to $11,000. 
There is an emergency exception that allows you to 
use your hand-held mobile telephones if necessary 
to communicate with law enforcement officials or 
other emergency services.  
Research shows that the odds of being involved in 
a safety-critical event (e.g., crash, near-crash, 
unintentional lane deviation) is 6 times greater for 
CMV drivers who engage in dialing a mobile 
telephone while driving than for those who do not. 
Dialing drivers took their eyes off the forward 
roadway for an average of 3.8 seconds. At 55 mph 
(or 80.7 feet per second), this equates to a driver 
traveling 306 feet, the approximate length of a 
football field, without looking at the roadway. 
Your primary responsibility is to operate a motor 
vehicle safely. To do this, you must focus your full 
attention on the driving task.  
Note that hands-free devices are no less likely than 
hand-held cell phones to cause you to become 
distracted.  Attention is diverted from the driving task 
while using either device. 
2.9.5 –Texting 
49 CFR Part 383, 384, 390, 391, 392, the Federal 
Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR) 
prohibits texting by commercial motor vehicle 
(CMV) drivers while operating in interstate 
commerce; and implements new driver 
disqualification sanctions for drivers of CMVs who 
fail to comply with this Federal prohibition; or who 
have multiple convictions for violating a State or 
local law or ordinance on motor vehicle traffic 
control that prohibits texting while driving. 
Additionally, motor carriers are prohibited from 
requiring or allowing their drivers to engage in 
texting while driving.  
Texting means manually entering text into, or 
reading text from, an electronic device. This 
includes, but is not limited to, short message 
service, e-mailing, instant messaging, a command 
or request to access a World Wide Web page, or 
engaging in any other form of electronic text 
retrieval or entry, for present or future 
communication. 
Electronic device includes, but is not limited to, a 
cellular telephone; personal digital assistant; pager; 
computer; or any other device used to enter, write, 
send, receive, or read text. 
Your CDL will be disqualified after two or more 
convictions of any state law on texting while 
operating a CMV. Disqualification is 60 days for the 
second offense within 3 years and 120 days for 
three or more offenses within 3 years. In addition, 
the first and each subsequent violation of such a 
prohibition are subject to civil penalties imposed on 
such drivers, in an amount up to $2,750. No motor 
carrier shall allow or require its drivers to engage in 
texting while driving. There is an emergency 
exception that allows you text if necessary to 
communicate with law enforcement officials or other 
emergency services. 
Evidence suggests that text messaging is even 
riskier than talking on a cell phone because it 
requires you to look at a small screen and 
manipulate the keypad with one’s hands.  Texting is 
the most alarming distraction because it involves 
both physical and mental distraction 
simultaneously. 
Research shows that the odds of being involved in 
a safety-critical event (e.g., crash, near-crash, 
unintentional lane deviation) is 23.2 times greater 
--- PAGE 50 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-23 
Version: July 2017 
for CMV drivers who engage in texting while driving 
than for those who do not. Sending or receiving text 
takes your eyes from the road for an average of 4.6 
seconds.  At 55 mph, you would travel 371 feet, or 
the length of an entire football field – without looking
at the roadway.  
2.9.6 – Don’t Drive Distracted 
Your goal should be to eliminate all in-vehicle 
distractions before driving begins. Accomplishing 
this goal can be done by: 
Assessing all potential in-vehicle distractions before 
driving 
Developing a preventative plan to reduce/eliminate 
possible distractions 
Expecting distractions to occur 
Discussing possible scenarios before getting behind 
the wheel 
Based on the assessment of potential distractions, 
you can formulate a preventative plan to 
reduce/eliminate possible distractions. 
If drivers react a half-second slower because of 
distractions, crashes double. Some tips to follow so 
you won’t become distracted:
Turn off all communication devices. 
If you must use a mobile phone, make sure it is 
within close proximity, that it is operable while you 
are restrained, use an earpiece or the speaker 
phone function, use voice-activated dialing; or use 
the hands-free feature. Drivers are not in 
compliance if they unsafely reach for a mobile 
phone, even if they intend to use the hands-free 
function.  
Do not type or read a text message on a mobile 
device while driving. 
Familiarize yourself with your vehicle’s features and 
equipment, before you get behind the wheel. 
Adjust all vehicle controls and mirrors to your 
preferences prior to driving. 
Pre-program radio stations and pre-load your 
favorite CDs. 
Clear the vehicle of any unnecessary objects and 
secure cargo. 
Review maps, program the GPS and plan your route 
before you begin driving. 
Don’t attempt to read or write while you drive. 
Avoid smoking, eating and drinking while you drive. 
Leave early to allow yourself time to stop to eat. 
Don’t engage in complex or emotionally intense 
conversations with other occupants. 
Secure commitment from other occupants to 
behave responsibly and to support the driver in 
reducing distractions. 
2.9.7 – Watch Out for Other Distracted Drivers 
You need to be able to recognize other drivers who 
are engaged in any form of driving distraction. Not 
recognizing other distracted drivers can prevent you 
from perceiving or reacting correctly in time to 
prevent a crash. Watch for: 
Vehicles that may drift over the lane divider lines or 
within their own lane. 
Vehicles traveling at inconsistent speeds. 
Drivers who are preoccupied with maps, food, 
cigarettes, cell phones, or other objects. 
Drivers who appear to be involved in conversations 
with their passengers. 
Give a distracted driver plenty of room and maintain 
your safe following distance. 
Be very careful when passing a driver who seems 
to be distracted. The other driver may not be aware 
of your presence, and they may drift in front of you. 
2.10 – Aggressive Drivers/Road Rage 
2.10.1 – What Is It? 
Aggressive driving and road rage is not a new 
problem. However, in today’s world, where heavy 
and slow-moving traffic and tight schedules are the 
norm, more and more drivers are taking out their 
anger and frustration in their vehicles.  
Crowded roads leave little room for error, leading to 
suspicion and hostility among drivers and 
encouraging them to take personally the mistakes 
of other drivers. 
Aggressive driving is the act of operating a motor 
vehicle in a selfish, bold, or pushy manner, without 
regard for the rights or safety of others (i.e. changing 
lanes frequently and abruptly without notice)..  
Road rage is operating a motor vehicle with the 
intent of doing harm to others or physically 
assaulting a driver or their vehicle. 
2.10.2 – Don’t Be an Aggressive Driver 
How you feel before you even start your vehicle has 
a lot to do with how stress will affect you while 
driving.  
--- PAGE 51 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-24 
Version: July 2017 
Reduce your stress before and while you drive. 
Listen to “easy listening” music.  
Give the drive your full attention. Don’t allow 
yourself to become distracted by talking on your 
cell phone, eating, etc.  
Be realistic about your travel time. Expect delays 
because of traffic, construction, or bad weather 
and make allowances. 
If you’re going to be later than you expected – deal 
with it. Take a deep breath and accept the delay. 
Give other drivers the benefit of the doubt. Try to 
imagine why he or she is driving that way. 
Whatever their reason, it has nothing to do with 
you. 
Slow down and keep your following distance 
reasonable. 
Don’t drive slowly in the left lane of traffic. 
Avoid gestures. Keep your hands on the wheel. 
Avoid making any gestures that might anger 
another driver, even seemingly harmless 
expressions of irritation like shaking your head. 
Be a cautious and courteous driver. If another 
driver seems eager to get in front of you, say, “Be 
my guest.” This response will soon become a habit 
and you won’t be as offended by other drivers’ 
actions. 
2.10.3 – What You Should Do When Confronted 
by an Aggressive Driver 
First and foremost, make every attempt to get out 
of their way. 
Put your pride in the back seat. Do not challenge 
them by speeding up or attempting to hold-your-
own in your travel lane. 
Avoid eye contact. 
Ignore gestures and refuse to react to them. 
Report aggressive drivers to the appropriate 
authorities by providing a vehicle description, 
license number, location and, if possible, direction 
of travel. 
If you have a cell phone, and can do it safely, call 
the police. 
If an aggressive driver is involved in a crash farther 
down the road, stop a safe distance from the crash 
scene, wait for the police to arrive, and report the 
driving behavior that you witnessed. 
Subsections 2.9 and 2.10 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. What are some tips to follow so you won’t
become a distracted driver?
2. How do you use in-vehicle communications
equipment cautiously?
3. How do you recognize a distracted driver?
4. What is the difference between aggressive
driving and road rage?
5. What should you do when confronted with an
aggressive driver?
6. What are some things you can do to reduce
your stress before and while you drive?
These questions may be on the test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.9 and 2.10. 
2.11 – Driving at Night 
2.11.1 – It's More Dangerous 
You are at greater risk when you drive at night. 
Drivers can't see hazards as quickly as in daylight, 
so they have less time to respond. Drivers caught 
by surprise are less able to avoid a crash. 
The problems of night driving involve the driver, the 
roadway, and the vehicle.  
2.11.2 – Driver Factors 
Vision. Good vision is critical for safe driving.  Your 
control of the brake, accelerator, and steering wheel 
is based on what you see.  If you cannot see clearly, 
you will have trouble identifying traffic and roadway 
conditions, spotting potential trouble or responding 
to problems in a timely manner. 
Because seeing well is so critical to safe driving, you 
should have your eyes checked regularly by an eye 
specialist.  You may never know you have poor 
vision unless your eyes are tested.  If you need to 
wear glasses or contact lenses for driving, 
remember to: 
Always wear them when driving, even if driving short 
distances.  If your driver license says corrective 
lenses are required, it is illegal to move a vehicle 
without using corrective lenses. 
Keep an extra set of corrective lenses in your 
vehicle.  If your normal corrective lenses are broken 
or lost, you can use the spare lenses to drive safely.  
--- PAGE 52 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-25 
Version: July 2017 
Avoid using dark or tinted corrective lenses at night, 
even if you think they help with glare.  Tinted lenses 
cut down the light that you need to see clearly under 
night driving conditions. 
Glare. Drivers can be blinded for a short time by 
bright light. . It can take several seconds to recover 
from glare. Even two seconds of glare blindness can 
be dangerous. A vehicle going 55 mph will travel 
more than half the distance of a football field during 
that time.  
Fatigue and Lack of Alertness. Fatigue is physical 
or mental tiredness that can be caused by physical 
or mental strain, repetitive tasks, illness or lack of 
sleep.  Just like alcohol and drugs, it impairs your 
vision and judgment.   
Fatigue causes errors related to speed and 
distance, increases your risk of being in a crash, 
causes you to not see and react to hazards as  
quickly; and affects your ability to make critical 
decisions.   When you are fatigued, you could fall 
asleep behind the wheel and crash, injuring or killing 
yourself or others. 
Fatigued or drowsy driving is one of the leading 
causes of traffic collisions.  NHTSA estimates that 
100,000 police-reported crashes a year are the 
result of drowsy driving.  According to the National 
Sleep Foundation’s Sleep in America poll, 60% of 
Americans have driven while feeling sleepy and 
more than one third (36 percent or 103 million 
people) admit to having actually fallen asleep at the 
wheel.  Drivers may experience short bursts of sleep 
lasting only a few seconds or fall asleep for longer 
periods of time.  Either way, the chance of a collision 
increases dramatically. 
At-Risk Groups 
The risk of having a crash due to drowsy driving is 
not uniformly distributed across the population. 
Crashes tend to occur at times when sleepiness is 
most pronounced, for example, during the night and 
in the mid-afternoon. Most people are less alert at 
night, especially after midnight. This is particularly 
true if you have been driving for a long time. Thus 
individuals who drive at night are much more likely 
to have fall-asleep crashes.  
Research has identified young males, shift workers, 
commercial drivers, especially long-haul drivers and 
people with untreated sleep disorders or with short-
term or chronic sleep deprivation as being at 
increased risk for having a fall-asleep crash. At least 
15% of all heavy truck crashes involve fatigue. 
A congressionally mandated study of 80 long-haul 
truck drivers in the United States and Canada found 
that drivers averaged less than 5 hours of sleep per 
day. (Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
1996) It is no surprise then that the National 
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) reported that 
drowsy driving was probably the cause of more than 
half of crashes leading to a truck driv er’s death.
(NTSB, 1990) For each truck driver fatality, another 
three to four people are killed. (NHTSA, 1994) 
Warning Signs of Fatigue 
According to the National Sleep Foundation’s Sleep 
in America poll, 60% of Americans have driven while 
feeling sleepy and 36% admit to actually having 
fallen asleep at the wheel in the past year. However, 
many people cannot tell if or when they are about to 
fall asleep. Here are some signs that should tell you 
to stop and rest: 
Difficulty focusing, frequent blinking or heavy 
eyelids 
Yawning repeatedly or rubbing eyes 
Day-dreaming; or wandering/disconnected 
thoughts 
Trouble remembering the last few miles driven; 
missing exits or traffic signs  
Trouble keeping head up 
Drifting from your lane, following too closely or 
hitting a shoulder rumble strip 
Feeling restless and irritable 
When you are tired trying to “push on” is far more 
dangerous than most drivers think. It is a major 
cause of fatal accidents. If you notice any signs of 
fatigue, stop driving and go to sleep for the night or 
take a 15 – 20 minute nap. 
Are You At Risk? 
Before you drive, consider whether you are: 
Sleep-deprived or fatigued (6 hours of sleep or less 
triples your risk) 
Suffering from sleep loss (insomnia), poor quality 
sleep, or a sleep debt 
Driving long distances without proper rest breaks 
Driving through the night, mid-afternoon or when 
you would normally be asleep. Many heavy motor 
vehicle accidents occur between midnight and 6 
a.m.  
Taking sedating medications (antidepressants, cold 
tablets, antihistamines) 
Working more than 60 hours a week (increases your 
risk by 40%) 
Working more than one job, and your main job 
involves shift work 
Driving alone or on a long, rural, dark or boring road 
Flying, changing time zone 
--- PAGE 53 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-26 
Version: July 2017 
Preventing drowsiness before a trip: 
Get adequate sleep – adults need 8 to 9 hours to 
maintain alertness 
Prepare route carefully to identify total distance, 
stopping points and other logistic considerations 
Schedule trips for the hours you are normally 
awake, not the middle of the night 
Drive with a passenger 
Avoid medications that cause drowsiness 
Consult your physician if you suffer from daytime 
sleepiness, have difficulty sleeping at night or take 
frequent naps 
Incorporate exercise into your daily life to give you 
more energy. 
Maintaining alertness while driving: 
Protect yourself from glare and eyestrain with 
sunglasses 
Keep cool by opening the window or using the air 
conditioner 
Avoid heavy foods 
Be aware of down time during the day 
Have another person ride with you, and take turns 
driving 
Take periodic breaks – about every 100 miles or 2 
hours during long trips 
Stop driving and get some rest or take a nap 
Caffeine consumption can increase awareness for 
a few hours, but do not drink too much. It will 
eventually wear off. Do not rely on caffeine t o 
prevent fatigue 
Avoid drugs. While they may keep you awake for a 
while, they won’t make you alert.  
If you are drowsy, the only safe cure is to get off the 
road and get some sleep. If you don't, you risk your 
life and the lives of others.   
2.11.3 – Roadway Factors 
Poor Lighting. In the daytime there is usually 
enough light to see well. This is not true at night. 
Some areas may have bright street lights, but many 
areas will have poor lighting. On most roads you will 
probably have to depend entirely on your 
headlights. 
Less light means you will not be able to see hazards 
as well as in daytime. Road users who do not have 
lights are hard to see. There are many accidents at 
night involving pedestrians, joggers, bicyclists, and 
animals. 
Even when there are lights, the road scene can be 
confusing. Traffic signals and hazards can be hard 
to see against a background of signs, shop 
windows, and other lights. 
Drive slower when lighting is poor or confusing.  
Drive slowly enough to be sure you can stop in the 
distance you can see ahead. 
Drunk Drivers. Drunk drivers and drivers under the 
influence of drugs are a hazard to themselves and 
to you. Be especially alert around the closing times 
for bars and taverns. Watch for drivers who have 
trouble staying in their lane or maintaining speed, 
who stop without reason, or show other signs of 
being under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
2.11.4 – Vehicle Factors 
Headlights. At night your headlights will usually be 
the main source of light for you to see by and for 
others to see you. You can't see nearly as much with 
your headlights as you see in the daytime. With low 
beams you can see ahead about 250 feet and with 
high beams about 350-500 feet. You must adjust 
your speed to keep your stopping distance within 
your sight distance. This means going slowly 
enough to be able to stop within the range of your 
headlights. Otherwise, by the time you see a 
hazard, you will not have time to stop. 
Night driving can be more dangerous if you have 
problems with your headlights. Dirty headlights may 
give only half the light they should. This cuts down 
your ability to see, and makes it harder for others to 
see you. Make sure your lights are clean and 
working. Headlights can be out of adjustment. If they 
don't point in the right direction, they won't give you 
a good view and they can blind other drivers. Have 
a qualified person make sure they are adjusted 
properly. 
Other Lights. In order for you to be seen easily, the 
following must be clean and working properly: 
Reflectors. 
Marker lights. 
Clearance lights. 
Taillights. 
Identification lights. 
Turn Signals and Brake Lights. At night your turn 
signals and brake lights are even more important for 
telling other drivers what you intend to do. Make 
sure you have clean, working turn signals and stop 
lights. 
Windshield and Mirrors. It is more important at 
night than in the daytime to have a clean windshield 
--- PAGE 54 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-27 
Version: July 2017 
and clean mirrors. Bright lights at night can cause 
dirt on your windshield or mirrors to create a glare 
of its own, blocking your view. Most people have 
experienced driving toward the sun just as it has 
risen or is about to set, and found that they can 
barely see through a windshield that seemed to look 
OK in the middle of the day. Clean your windshield 
on the inside and outside for safe driving at night. 
2.11.5 – Night Driving Procedures 
Vehicle Procedures. Make sure you are rested and 
alert. If you are drowsy, sleep before you drive! 
Even a nap can save your life or the lives of others. 
If you wear eyeglasses, make sure they are clean 
and unscratched. Don't wear sunglasses at night. 
Do a complete Vehicle inspection of your vehicle. 
Pay attention to checking all lights and reflectors, 
and cleaning those you can reach. 
Avoid Blinding Others. Glare from your headlights 
can cause problems for drivers coming toward you. 
They can also bother drivers going in the same 
direction you are, when your lights shine in their 
rearview mirrors. Dim your lights before they cause 
glare for other drivers. Dim your lights within 500 
feet of an oncoming vehicle and when following 
another vehicle within 500 feet. 
Avoid Glare from Oncoming Vehicles. Do not 
look directly at lights of oncoming vehicles. Look 
slightly to the right at a right lane or edge marking, 
if available. If other drivers don't put their low beams 
on, don't try to "get back at them" by putting your 
own high beams on. This increases glare for 
oncoming drivers and increases the chance of a 
crash. 
Use High Beams When You Can. Some drivers 
make the mistake of always using low beams. This 
seriously cuts down on their ability to see ahead. 
Use high beams when it is safe and legal to do so. 
Use them when you are not within 500 feet of an 
approaching vehicle. Also, don't let the inside of 
your cab get too bright. This makes it harder to see 
outside. Keep the interior light off, and adjust your 
instrument lights as low as you can to still be able to 
read the gauges. 
If You Get Sleepy, Stop at the Nearest Safe 
Place. People often don't realize how close they are 
to falling asleep even when their eyelids are falling 
shut. If you can safely do so, look at yourself in a 
mirror. If you look sleepy, or you just feel sleepy, 
stop driving! You are in a very dangerous condition. 
The only safe cure is to sleep. 
2.12 – Driving in Fog 
Fog can occur at any time. Fog on highways can be 
extremely dangerous. Fog is often unexpected, and 
visibility can deteriorate rapidly. You should watch 
for foggy conditions and be ready to reduce your 
speed. Do not assume that the fog will thin out after 
you enter it. 
The best advice for d riving in fog is don’t. It is
preferable that you pull off the road into a rest area 
or truck stop until visibility is better. If you must drive, 
be sure to consider the following: 
Obey all fog-related warning signs. 
Slow down before you enter fog. 
Use low-beam headlights and fog lights for best 
visibility even in daytime, and be alert for other 
drivers who may have forgotten to turn on their 
lights.  
Turn on your 4-way flashers. This will give vehicles 
approaching you from behind a quicker opportunity 
to notice your vehicle. 
Watch for vehicles on the side of the roadway. 
Seeing taillights or headlights in front of you may 
not be a true indication of where the road is ahead 
of you. The vehicle may not be on the road at all. 
Use roadside highway reflectors as guides to 
determine how the road may curve ahead of you. 
Listen for traffic you cannot see. 
Avoid passing other vehicles. 
Don’t stop along the side of the road, unless 
absolutely necessary.  
2.13 – Driving in Winter 
2.13.1 – Vehicle Checks 
Make sure your vehicle is ready before driving in 
winter weather. You should make a regular Vehicle 
inspection, paying extra attention to the following 
items. 
Coolant Level and Antifreeze Amount. Make sure 
the cooling system is full and there is enough 
antifreeze in the system to protect against freezing. 
This can be checked with a special coolant tester. 
Defrosting and Heating Equipment. Make sure 
the defrosters work. They are needed for safe 
driving. Make sure the heater is working, and that 
you know how to operate it. If you use other heaters 
and expect to need them (e.g., mirror heaters, 
battery box heaters, fuel tank heaters), check their 
operation. 
--- PAGE 55 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-28 
Version: July 2017 
Wipers and Washers. Make sure the windshield 
wiper blades are in good condition. Make sure the 
wiper blades press against the window hard enough 
to wipe the windshield clean, otherwise they may 
not sweep off snow properly. Make sure the 
windshield washer works and there is washing fluid 
in the washer reservoir. 
Use windshield washer antifreeze to prevent 
freezing of the washer liquid. If you can't see well 
enough while driving (for example, if your wipers 
fail), stop safely and fix the problem. 
Tires. Make sure you have enough tread on your 
tires. The drive tires must provide traction to push 
the rig over wet pavement and through snow. The 
steering tires must have traction to steer the vehicle. 
Enough tread is especially important in winter 
conditions. You must have at least 4/32 inch tread 
depth in every major groove on front tires and at 
least 2/32 inch on other tires. More would be better. 
Use a gauge to determine if you have enough tread 
for safe driving. 
Tire Chains. You may find yourself in conditions 
where you can't drive without chains, even to get to 
a place of safety. Carry the right number of chains 
and extra cross-links. Make sure they will fit your 
drive tires. Check the chains for broken hooks, worn 
or broken cross-links, and bent or broken side 
chains. Learn how to put the chains on before you 
need to do it in snow and ice. 
Lights and Reflectors. Make sure the lights and 
reflectors are clean. Lights and reflectors are 
especially important during bad weather. Check 
from time to time during bad weather to make sure 
they are clean and working properly. 
Windows and Mirrors. Remove any ice, snow, 
etc., from the windshield, windows, and mirrors 
before starting. Use a windshield scraper, snow 
brush, and windshield defroster as necessary. 
Hand Holds, Steps, and Deck Plates. Remove all 
ice and snow from hand holds, steps, and deck 
plates. This will reduce the danger of slipping. 
Radiator Shutters and Winterfront. Remove ice 
from the radiator shutters. Make sure the winterfront 
is not closed too tightly. If the shutters freeze shut 
or the winterfront is closed too much, the engine 
may overheat and stop.  
Exhaust System. Exhaust system leaks are 
especially dangerous when cab ventilation may be 
poor (windows rolled up, etc.). Loose connections 
could permit poisonous carbon monoxide to leak 
into your vehicle. Carbon monoxide gas will cause 
you to be sleepy. In large enough amounts it can kill 
you. Check the exhaust system for loose parts and 
for sounds and signs of leaks. 
2.13.2 – Driving 
Slippery Surfaces. Drive slowly and smoothly on 
slippery roads. If it is very slippery, you shouldn't 
drive at all. Stop at the first safe place. 
Start Gently and Slowly. When first starting, get 
the feel of the road. Don't hurry. 
Check for Ice. Check for ice on the road, especially 
bridges and overpasses. A lack of spray from other 
vehicles indicates ice has formed on the road. Also, 
check your mirrors and wiper blades for ice. If they 
have ice, the road most likely will be icy as well. 
Adjust Turning and Braking to Conditions. Make 
turns as gently as possible. Don't brake any harder 
than necessary, and don't use the engine brake or 
speed retarder. (They can cause the driving wheels 
to skid on slippery surfaces.) 
Adjust Speed to Conditions.  Don't pass slower 
vehicles unless necessary. Go slowly and watch far 
enough ahead to keep a steady speed. Avoid 
having to slow down and speed up. Take curves at 
slower speeds and don't brake while in curves. Be 
aware that as the temperature rises to the point 
where ice begins to melt, the road becomes even 
more slippery. Slow down more. 
Adjust Space to Conditions. Don't drive alongside 
other vehicles. Keep a longer following distance. 
When you see a traffic jam ahead, slow down or 
stop to wait for it to clear. Try hard to anticipate 
stops early and slow down gradually. Watch for 
snowplows, as well as salt and sand trucks, and 
give them plenty of room. 
Wet Brakes. When driving in heavy rain or deep 
standing water, your brakes will get wet. Water in 
the brakes can cause the brakes to be weak, to 
apply unevenly, or to grab. This can cause lack of 
braking power, wheel lockups, pulling to one side or 
the other, and jackknife if you pull a trailer. 
Avoid driving through deep puddles or flowing water 
if possible. If not, you should: 
Slow down and place transmission in a low gear. 
Gently put on the brakes. This presses linings 
against brake drums or discs and keeps mud, silt, 
sand, and water from getting in. 
Increase engine rpm and cross the water while 
keeping light pressure on the brakes. 
--- PAGE 56 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-29 
Version: July 2017 
When out of the water, maintain light pressure on 
the brakes for a short distance to heat them up and 
dry them out. 
Make a test stop when safe to do so. Check 
behind to make sure no one is following, then 
apply the brakes to be sure they work well. If not, 
dry them out further as described above. 
(CAUTION: Do not apply too much brake pressure 
and accelerator at the same time, or you can 
overheat brake drums and linings. 
2.14 – Driving in Very Hot Weather 
2.14.1 – Vehicle Checks 
Do a normal Vehicle inspection, but pay special 
attention to the following items. 
Tires. Check the tire mounting and air pressure. 
Inspect the tires every two hours or every 100 miles 
when driving in very hot weather. Air pressure 
increases with temperature. Do not let air out or the 
pressure will be too low when the tires cool off. If a 
tire is too hot to touch, remain stopped until the tire 
cools off. Otherwise the tire may blow out or catch 
fire. 
Engine Oil. The engine oil helps keep the engine 
cool, as well as lubricating it. Make sure there is 
enough engine oil. If you have an oil temperature 
gauge, make sure the temperature is within the 
proper range while you are driving. 
Engine Coolant. Before starting out, make sure the 
engine cooling system has enough water and 
antifreeze according to the engine manufacturer's 
directions. (Antifreeze helps the engine under hot 
conditions as well as cold conditions.) When driving, 
check the water temperature or coolant temperature 
gauge from time to time. Make sure that it remains 
in the normal range. If the gauge goes above the 
highest safe temperature, there may be something 
wrong that could lead to engine failure and possibly 
fire. Stop driving as soon as safely possible and try 
to find out what is wrong. 
Some vehicles have sight glasses, see-through 
coolant overflow containers, or coolant recovery 
containers. These permit you to check the coolant 
level while the engine is hot. If the container is not 
part of the pressurized system, the cap can be 
safely removed and coolant added even when the 
engine is at operating temperature. 
Never remove the radiator cap or any part of the 
pressurized system until the system has cooled. 
Steam and boiling water can spray under pressure 
and cause severe burns. If you can touch the 
radiator cap with your bare hand, it is probably cool 
enough to open. 
If coolant has to be added to a system without a 
recovery tank or overflow tank, follow these steps: 
Shut engine off. 
Wait until engine has cooled. 
Protect hands (use gloves or a thick cloth). 
Turn radiator cap slowly to the first stop, which 
releases the pressure seal. 
Step back while pressure is released from cooling 
system. 
When all pressure has been released, press down 
on the cap and turn it further to remove it. 
Visually check level of coolant and add more 
coolant if necessary. 
Replace cap and turn all the way to the closed 
position. 
Engine Belts. Learn how to check v- belt tightness 
on your vehicle by pressing on the belts. Loose belts 
will not turn the water pump and/or fan properly. 
This will result in overheating. Also, check belts for 
cracking or other signs of wear. 
Hoses. Make sure coolant hoses are in good 
condition. A broken hose while driving can lead to 
engine failure and even fire. 
2.14.2 – Driving 
Watch for Bleeding Tar. Tar in the road pavement 
frequently rises to the surface in very hot weather. 
Spots where tar "bleeds" to the surface are very 
slippery. 
Go Slowly Enough to Prevent Overheating. High 
speeds create more heat for tires and the engine. In 
desert conditions the heat may build up to the point 
where it is dangerous. The heat will increase 
chances of tire failure or even fire, and engine 
failure. 
Subsections 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, and 2.14 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. You should use low beams whenever you can.
True or False?
2. What should you do before you drive if you are
drowsy?
3. What effects can wet brakes cause? How can
you avoid these problems?
4. You should let air out of hot tires so the
pressure goes back to normal. True or False?
5. You can safely remove the radiator cap as long
as the engine isn't overheated. True or False?
--- PAGE 57 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-30 
Version: July 2017 
These questions may be on the test. If you can’t 
answer all of them, re-read subsections 2.11, 2.12, 
2.13, and 2.14. 
2.15 – Railroad-highway Crossings 
Railroad-highway grade crossings are a special 
kind of intersection where the roadway crosses train 
tracks. These crossings are always dangerous. 
Every such crossing must be approached with the 
expectation that a train is coming.   It is extremely 
difficult to judge the distance of the train from the 
crossing as well as the speed of an approaching 
train. 
2.15.1 – Types of Crossings 
Passive Crossings. This type of crossing does not 
have any type of traffic control device. The decision 
to stop or proceed rests entirely in your hands. 
Passive crossings require you to recognize the 
crossing, search for any train using the tracks and 
decide if there is sufficient clear space to cross 
safely. 
Active Crossings. This type of crossing has a 
traffic control device installed at the crossing to 
regulate traffic at the crossing. These active devices 
include flashing red lights, with or without bells and 
flashing red lights with bells and gates. 
2.15.2 – Warning Signs and Devices 
Advance Warning Signs. The round, black- on-
yellow warning sign is placed ahead of a public 
railroad-highway crossing. The advance warning 
sign tells you to slow down, look and listen for the 
train, and be prepared to stop at the tracks if a train 
is coming. All passenger and hazmat carrying 
vehicles are required to stop.  
See Figure 2.15. 
   Figure 2.15 
Pavement Markings. Pavement markings mean 
the same as the advance warning sign. They consist 
of an “X” with the letters “”RR” and a no -passing 
marking on two-lane roads. See Figure 2.16. 
Figure 2.16 
There is also a no passing zone sign on two-lane 
roads. There may be a white stop line painted on 
the pavement before the railroad tracks. The front of 
the school bus must remain behind this line while 
stopped at the crossing. 
Cross-buck Signs. This sign marks the grade 
crossing. It requires you to yield the right- of-way to 
the train. If there is no white stop line painted on the 
pavement, vehicles that are required to stop must 
stop no closer than 15 feet or more than 50 feet from 
the nearest rail of the nearest track.  When the road 
crosses over more than one track, a sign below the 
cross-buck indicates the number of tracks. See 
Figure 2.17. 
Figure2.17 
Flashing Red Light Signals. At many highway-rail 
grade crossings, the cross-buck sign has flashing 
red lights and bells. When the lights begin to flash, 
stop! A train is approaching. You are required to 
yield the right- of-way to the train. If there is more 

--- PAGE 58 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-31 
Version: July 2017 
than one track, make sure all tracks are clear before 
crossing. See Figure 2.18. 
Gates. Many railroad-highway crossings have 
gates with flashing red lights and bells. Stop when 
the lights begin to flash and before the gate lowers 
across the road lane. Remain stopped until the 
gates go up and the lights have stopped flashing. 
Proceed when it is safe. See Figure 2.18. 
Figure 2.18 
2.15.3 – Driving Procedures 
Never Race a Train to a Crossing.  Never attempt 
to race a train to a crossing. It is extremely difficult 
to judge the speed of an approaching train. 
Reduce Speed. Speed must be reduced in 
accordance with your ability to see approaching 
trains in any direction, and speed must be held to a 
point which will permit you to stop short of the tracks 
in case a stop is necessary. 
Don't Expect to Hear a Train. Trains may not or 
are prohibited from sounding horns when 
approaching some crossings.  Public crossings 
where trains do not sound horns should be identified 
by signs.   Noise inside your vehicle may, also 
prevent you from hearing the train horn until the train 
is dangerously close to the crossing. 
Don't Rely on Signals. You should not rely solely 
upon the presence of warning signals, gates, or 
flagmen to warn of the approach of trains. Be 
especially alert at crossings that do not have gates 
or flashing red light signals.  
Double Tracks Require a Double Check. 
Remember that a train on one track may hide a train 
on the other track. Look both ways before crossing. 
After one train has cleared a crossing, be sure no 
other trains are near before starting across the 
tracks. 
Yard Areas and Grade Crossings in Cities and 
Towns. Yard areas and grade crossings in cities 
and towns are just as dangerous as rural grade 
crossings. Approach them with as much caution. 
2.15.4 – Stopping Safely at Railroad- highway 
Crossings 
A full stop is required at grade crossings whenever: 
The nature of the cargo makes a stop mandatory 
under state or federal regulations. 
Such a stop is otherwise required by law. 
When stopping be sure to: 
Check for traffic behind you while stopping 
gradually. Use a pullout lane, if available. 
Turn on your four-way emergency flashers. 
2.15.5 – Crossing the Tracks 
Railroad crossings with steep approaches can 
cause your unit to hang up on the tracks. 
Never permit traffic conditions to trap you in a 
position where you have to stop on the tracks. Be 
sure you can get all the way across the tracks before 
you start across. It takes a typical tractor-trailer unit 
at least 14 seconds to clear a single track and more 
than 15 seconds to clear a double track. 
Do not shift gears while crossing railroad tracks. 
2.15.6 – Special Situations 
Be Aware! These trailers can get stuck on raised 
crossings: 
Low slung units (lowboy, car carrier, moving van, 
possum-belly livestock trailer). 
Single-axle tractor pulling a long trailer with its 
landing gear set to accommodate a tandem-axle 
tractor. 
If for any reason you get stuck on the tracks, get out 
of the vehicle and away from the tracks. Check 
signposts or signal housing at the crossing for 
emergency notification information. Call 911 or 
other emergency number. Give the location of the 
crossing using all identifiable landmarks, especially 
the DOT number, if posted. 

--- PAGE 59 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-32  
Version: July 2017 
 
2.16 – Mountain Driving 
In mountain driving, gravity plays a major rol e. On 
any upgrade, gravity slows you down. The steeper 
the grade, the longer the grade, and/or the heavier 
the load--the more you will have to use lower gears 
to climb hills or mountains. In coming down long, 
steep downgrades, gravity causes the speed of your 
vehicle to increase. You must select an appropriate 
safe speed, then use a low gear, and proper braking 
techniques. You should plan ahead and obtain 
information about any long, steep grades along your 
planned route of travel. If possible, talk to other  
drivers who are familiar with the grades to find out 
what speeds are safe. 
 
You must go slowly enough so your brakes can hold 
you back without getting too hot. If the brakes 
become too hot, they may start to "fade." This 
means you have to apply them harder and harder to 
get the same stopping power. If you continue to use 
the brakes hard, they can keep fading until you 
cannot slow down or stop at all. 
 
2.16.1 – Select a "Safe" Speed 
Your most important consideration is to select a 
speed that is not too fast for the: 
Total weight of the vehicle and cargo. 
Length of the grade. 
Steepness of the grade. 
Road conditions. 
Weather. 
 
If a speed limit is posted, or there is a sign indicating 
"Maximum Safe Speed," never exceed the speed 
shown. Also, look for and heed w arning signs 
indicating the length and steepness of the grade. 
 
You must use the braking effect of the engine as the 
principal way of controlling your speed. The braking 
effect of the engine is greatest when it is near the 
governed rpms and the transmission is in the lower 
gears. Save your brakes so you will be able to slow 
or stop as required by road and traffic conditions. 
 
2.16.2 – Select the Right Gear before Starting 
Down the Grade 
Shift the transmission to a low gear before starting 
down the grade. Do  not try to downshift after your 
speed has already built up. You will not be able to 
shift into a lower gear. You may not even be able to 
get back into any gear and all engine braking effect 
will be lost. Forcing an automatic transmission into 
a lower gear  at high speed could damage the 
transmission and also lead to loss of all engine 
braking effect. 
With older trucks, a rule for choosing gears is to use 
the same gear going down a hill that you would need 
to climb the hill. However, new trucks have low 
friction parts and streamlined shapes for fuel 
economy. They may also have more powerful 
engines. This means they can go up hills in higher 
gears and have less friction and air drag to hold 
them back going down hills. For that reason, drivers 
of modern trucks may have to use lower gears going 
down a hill than would be required to go up the hill. 
You should know what is right for your vehicle. 
 
2.16.3 – Brake Fading or Failure 
Brakes are designed so brake shoes or pads rub 
against the brake drum or disks to slow the vehicle. 
Braking creates heat, but brakes are designed to 
take a lot of heat. However, brakes can fade or fail 
from excessive heat caused by using them too 
much and not relying on the engine braking effect. 
Brake fade is also affected by adjustment. To safely 
control a vehicle, every brake must do its share of 
the work. Brakes out of adjustment will stop doing 
their share before those that are in adjustment. The 
other brakes can then overheat and fade, and there 
will not be enough braking available to control the 
vehicle. Brakes can get out of adjustment quickly, 
especially when they are used a lot; also, brake 
linings wear faster when they are hot. Therefore, 
brake adjustment must be checked frequently. 
 
2.16.4 – Proper Braking Technique 
Remember. The use of brakes on a long and/or 
steep downgrade is only a supplement to the 
braking effect of the engine. Once the vehicle is in 
the proper low gear, the following are the proper 
braking techniques: 
Apply the brakes just hard enough to feel a definite 
slowdown. 
When your speed has been reduced to 
approximately five mph below your "safe" speed, 
release the brakes. (This brake application should 
last for about three seconds.) 
When your speed has increased to your "safe" 
speed, repeat steps 1 and 2. 
 
For exampl e, if your "safe" speed is 40 mph, you 
would not apply the brakes until your speed reaches 
40 mph. You now apply the brakes hard enough to 
gradually reduce your speed to 35 mph and then 
release the brakes. Repeat this as often as 
necessary until you have r eached the end of the 
downgrade. 
 
Escape ramps have been built on many steep 
mountain downgrades. Escape ramps are made to 
stop runaway vehicles safely without injuring drivers 
and passengers. Escape ramps use a long bed of 
--- PAGE 60 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-33 
Version: July 2017 
loose, soft material to slow a runaway vehicle, 
sometimes in combination with an upgrade.  
Know escape ramp locations on your route. Signs 
show drivers where ramp are located. Escape 
ramps save lives, equipment and cargo. 
Subsections 2.15 and 2.16 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. What factors determine your selection of a
"safe" speed when going down a long, steep
downgrade?
2. Why should you be in the proper gear before
starting down a hill?
3. Describe the proper braking technique when
going down a long, steep downgrade.
4. What type of vehicles can get stuck on a
railroad-highway crossing?
5. How long does it take for a typical tractor-trailer
unit to clear a double track?
These questions may be on the test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.15 and 2.16. 
2.17 – Driving Emergencies 
Traffic emergencies occur when two vehicles are 
about to collide. Vehicle emergencies occur when 
tires, brakes, or other critical parts fail. Following the 
safety practices in this manual can help prevent 
emergencies. But if an emergency does happen, 
your chances of avoiding a crash depend upon how 
well you take action. Actions you can take are 
discussed below. 
2.17.1 – Steering to Avoid a Crash 
Stopping is not always the safest thing to do in an 
emergency. When you don't have enough room to 
stop, you may have to steer away from what's 
ahead. Remember, you can almost always turn to 
miss an obstacle more quickly than you can stop. 
(However, top-heavy vehicles and tractors with 
multiple trailers may flip over.) 
Keep Both Hands on the Steering Wheel. In order 
to turn quickly, you must have a firm grip on the 
steering wheel with both hands. The best way to 
have both hands on the wheel, if there is an 
emergency, is to keep them there all the time. 
How to Turn Quickly and Safely. A quick turn can 
be made safely, if it's done the right way. Here are 
some points that safe drivers use: 
Do not apply the brake while you are turning. It's 
very easy to lock your wheels while turning. If that 
happens, you may skid out of control. 
Do not turn any more than needed to clear 
whatever is in your way. The more sharply you 
turn, the greater the chances of a skid or rollover. 
Be prepared to "counter-steer," that is, to turn the 
wheel back in the other direction, once you've 
passed whatever was in your path. Unless you are 
prepared to counter-steer, you won't be able to do 
it quickly enough. You should think of emergency 
steering and counter-steering as two parts of one 
driving action. 
Where to Steer. If an oncoming driver has drifted 
into your lane, a move to your right is best. If that 
driver realizes what has happened, the natural 
response will be to return to his or her own lane. 
If something is blocking your path, the best direction 
to steer will depend on the situation. 
If you have been using your mirrors, you'll know 
which lane is empty and can be safely used. 
If the shoulder is clear, going right may be best. No 
one is likely to be driving on the shoulder but 
someone may be passing you on the left. You will 
know if you have been using your mirrors. 
If you are blocked on both sides, a move to the 
right may be best. At least you won't force anyone 
into an opposing traffic lane and a possible head-
on collision. 
Leaving the Road. In some emergencies, you may 
have to drive off the road. It may be less risky than 
facing a collision with another vehicle. 
Most shoulders are strong enough to support the 
weight of a large vehicle and, therefore, offer an 
available escape route. Here are some guidelines, 
if you do leave the road. 
Avoid Braking. If possible, avoid using the brakes 
until your speed has dropped to about 20 mph. Then 
brake very gently to avoid skidding on a loose 
surface. 
Keep One Set of Wheels on the Pavement, if 
Possible. This helps to maintain control. 
Stay on the Shoulder. If the shoulder is clear, stay 
on it until your vehicle has come to a stop. Signal 
and check your mirrors before pulling back onto the 
road. 
Returning to the Road. If you are forced to return 
to the road before you can stop, use the following 
procedure: 
--- PAGE 61 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-34  
Version: July 2017 
 
Hold the wheel tightly and turn sharply enough to 
get right back on the road safely. Don't try to edge 
gradually back on the road. If you do, your tires 
might grab unexpectedly and you could lose 
control. 
When both front tires are on the paved surface, 
counter-steer immediately. The two turns should 
be made as a single "steer-counter-steer" move. 
 
2.17.2 – How to Stop Quickly and Safely 
If somebody suddenly pulls out in front of you, your 
natural response is to hit the brakes. This is a good 
response if there's enough distance to stop, and you 
use the brakes correctly. 
 
You should brake in a way that will keep your 
vehicle in a straight line and allow you to turn if it  
becomes necessary. You can use the "controlled 
braking" method or the "stab braking" method. 
 
Controlled Braking. With this method, you apply  
the brakes as hard as you can without locking the 
wheels. Keep steering wheel movements very small 
while doing this. If you need to make a larger 
steering adjustment or if the wheels lock, release 
the brakes. Re -apply the brakes as soon as you 
can. 
 
Stab Braking.  With this method , you apply your 
brakes all the way and release brakes when wheels 
lock up.  As soon as the wheels start rolling, apply 
the brakes fully again. (It can take up to one second 
for the wheels to start rolling after you release the 
brakes. If you re-apply the brakes before the wheels 
start rolling, the vehicle won't straighten out.) 
 
Don't Jam on the Brakes. Emergency braking 
does not mean pushing down on the brake pedal as 
hard as you can. That will only keep the wheels 
locked up and cause a skid. If the wheels are 
skidding, you cannot control the vehicle. 
 
2.17.3 – Brake Failure 
Brakes kept in good condition rarely fail. Most 
hydraulic brake failures occur for one of two 
reasons: (Air brakes are discussed in Section 5.) 
Loss of hydraulic pressure. 
Brake fade on long hills. 
Loss of Hydraulic Pressure. When the system 
won't build up pressure, the brake pedal will feel 
spongy or go to the floor. Here are some things you 
can do. 
 
Downshift. Putting the vehicle into a lower gear will 
help to slow the vehicle. 
 
Pump the Brakes. Sometimes pumping the brake 
pedal will generate enough hydraulic pressure to 
stop the vehicle. 
 
Use the Parking Brake. The parking or emergency 
brake is separate from the hydraulic brake system. 
Therefore, it can be us ed to slow the vehicle. 
However, be sure to press the release button or pull 
the release lever at the same time you use the 
emergency brake so you can adjust the brake 
pressure and keep the wheels from locking up. 
 
Find an Escape Route. While slowing the v ehicle, 
look for an escape route--an open field, side-street, 
or escape ramp. Turning uphill is a good way to slow 
and stop the vehicle. Make sure the vehicle does 
not start rolling backward after you stop. Put it in low 
gear, apply the parking brake, and, if necessary, roll 
back into some obstacle that will stop the vehicle. 
 
Brake Failure on Downgrades. Going slow 
enough and braking properly will almost always 
prevent brake failure on long downgrades. Once the 
brakes have failed, however, you are going to have 
to look outside your vehicle for something to stop it. 
Your best hope is an escape ramp. If there is one, 
there'll be signs telling you about it. Use it. Ramps 
are usually located a few miles from the top of the 
downgrade. Every year, hundreds of dri vers avoid 
injury to themselves or damage to their vehicles by 
using escape ramps. Some escape ramps use soft 
gravel that resists the motion of the vehicle and 
brings it to a stop. Others turn uphill, using the hill to 
stop the vehicle and soft gravel to hold it in place. 
Any driver who loses brakes going downhill should 
use an escape ramp if it's available. If you don't use 
it, your chances of having a serious crash may be 
much greater. 
If no escape ramp is available, take the least 
hazardous escape route you can--such as an open 
field or a side road that flattens out or turns uphill. 
Make the move as soon as you know your brakes 
don't work. The longer you wait, the faster the 
vehicle will go, and the harder it will be to stop. 
 
2.17.4 – Tire Failure 
Recognize Tire Failure. Quickly knowing you have 
a tire failure will let you have more time to react. 
Having just a few extra seconds to remember what 
it is you're supposed to do can help you. The major 
signs of tire failure are: 
 
--- PAGE 62 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-35 
Version: July 2017 
Sound. The loud "bang" of a blowout is an easily 
recognized sign. Because it can take a few seconds 
for your vehicle to react, you might think it was some 
other vehicle. But any time you hear a tire blow, 
you'd be safest to assume it is yours. 
Vibration. If the vehicle thumps or vibrates heavily, 
it may be a sign that one of the tires has gone flat. 
With a rear tire, that may be the only sign you get. 
Feel. If the steering feels "heavy," it is probably a 
sign that one of the front tires has failed. 
Sometimes, failure of a rear tire will cause the 
vehicle to slide back and forth or "fishtail." 
However, dual rear tires usually prevent this. 
Respond to Tire Failure. When a tire fails, your 
vehicle is in danger. You must immediately: 
Hold the Steering Wheel Firmly. If a front tire 
fails, it can twist the steering wheel out of your 
hand. The only way to prevent this is to keep a firm 
grip on the steering wheel with both hands at all 
times. 
Stay off the Brake. It's natural to want to brake in 
an emergency. However, braking when a tire has 
failed could cause loss of control. Unless you're 
about to run into something, stay off the brake until 
the vehicle has slowed down. Then brake very 
gently, pull off the road, and stop. 
Check the Tires. After you've come to a stop, get 
out and check all the tires. Do this even if the 
vehicle seems to be handling all right. If one of 
your dual tires goes, the only way you may know it 
is by getting out and looking at it. 
2.18 – Antilock Braking Systems (ABS) 
ABS is a computerized system that keeps your 
wheels from locking up during hard brake 
applications. 
ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does 
not decrease or increase your normal braking 
capability. ABS only activates when wheels are 
about to lock up. 
ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping 
distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle under 
control during hard braking. 
2.18.1 – How Antilock Braking Systems Work 
Sensors detect potential wheel lock up. An 
electronic control unit (ECU) will then decrease 
brake pressure to avoid wheel lockup. 
Brake pressure is adjusted to provide the maximum 
braking without danger of lockup. 
ABS works far faster than the driver can respond to 
potential wheel lockup. At all other times the brake 
system will operate normally. 
2.18.2 – Vehicles Required to Have Antilock 
Braking Systems 
The Department of Transportation requires that 
ABS be on: 
Truck tractors with air brakes built on or after 
March 1, 1997. 
Other air brake vehicles, (trucks, buses, trailers, 
and converter dollies) built on or after March 1, 
1998. 
Hydraulically braked trucks and buses with a gross 
vehicle weight rating of 10,000 lbs or more built on 
or after March 1, 1999. 
Many commercial vehicles built before these dates 
have been voluntarily equipped with ABS. 
2.18.3 – How to Know If Your Vehicle Is 
Equipped with ABS 
Tractors, trucks, and buses will have yellow ABS 
malfunction lamps on the instrument panel. 
Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on 
the left side, either on the front or rear corner.  
Dollies manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, are 
required to have a lamp on the left side. 
As a system check on newer vehicles, the 
malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb 
check, and then goes out quickly. On older systems, 
the lamp could stay on until you are driving over five 
mph. 
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes on 
once you are under way, you may have lost ABS 
control. 
In the case of towed units manufactured before it 
was required by the Department of Transportation, 
it may be difficult to tell if the unit is equipped with 
ABS. Look under the vehicle for the ECU and wheel 
speed sensor wires coming from the back of the 
brakes.  
2.18.4 – How ABS Helps You 
When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a 
vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up. 
When your steering wheels lock up, you lose 
steering control. When your other wheels lock up, 
you may skid, jackknife, or even spin the vehicle. 
--- PAGE 63 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-36  
Version: July 2017 
 
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up and maintain 
control. You may or may not be able to stop faster 
with ABS, but you should be able to steer around an 
obstacle while braking, and avoid skids caused by 
over braking. 
 
2.18.5 – ABS on the Tractor Only or Only on the 
Trailer 
Having ABS on only the tractor, only the trailer, or 
even on only one axle, still gives you more control 
over the vehicle during braking. Brake normally. 
 
When only the tractor has ABS, you should be able 
to maintain steering control, and there is less 
chance of jackknifing. But keep your eye on the 
trailer and let up on the brakes (if you can safely do 
so) if it begins to swing out. 
 
When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less 
likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control or 
start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if you 
can safely do so) until you regain control. 
 
2.18.6 – Braking with ABS 
When you drive a vehicle with ABS, you should 
brake as you always have. In other words: 
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely 
and stay in control. 
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you 
have ABS on the bus, tractor, the trailer, or both. 
As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer 
and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to 
stay in control. 
There is only one exception to this procedure. If you 
drive a straight truck or combination with working 
ABS on all axles, in an emerge ncy stop, you can 
fully apply the brakes. 
 
2.18.7 – Braking If ABS Is Not Working 
Without ABS you still have normal brake functions. 
Drive and brake as you always have. 
 
Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps to 
tell you if something isn’t working.  
 
As a system check on newer vehicles, the 
malfunction lamp comes on at start -up for a bulb 
check and then goes out quickly. On older systems, 
the lamp could stay on until you are driving over five 
mph. 
 
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes on 
once you are under way, you may have lost ABS 
control on one or more wheels. 
 
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still have 
regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the system 
serviced soon. 
 
2.18.8 – Safety Reminders 
ABS won’t allow you to drive faster, follow more 
closely, or drive less carefully. 
ABS won’t prevent power or turning skids–ABS 
should prevent brake-induced skids or jackknifes, 
but not those caused by spinning the drive wheels 
or going too fast in a turn. 
ABS won’t necessarily shorten stopping 
distance. ABS will help maintain vehicle control, 
but not always shorten stopping distance. 
ABS won’t increase or decrease ultimate 
stopping power–ABS is an “add-on” to your 
normal brakes, not a replacement for them. 
ABS won’t change the way you normally brake. 
Under normal brake conditions, your vehicle will 
stop as it always stopped. ABS only comes into 
play when a wheel would normally have locked up 
because of over braking. 
ABS won’t compensate for bad brakes or poor 
brake maintenance. 
Remember: The best vehicle safety feature is still 
a safe driver. 
Remember: Drive so you never need to use your 
ABS. 
Remember: If you need it, ABS could help to 
prevent a serious crash. 
 
2.19 – Skid Control and Recovery 
A skid happens whenever the tires lose their grip on 
the road. This is caused in one of four ways: 
 
Over-braking. Braking too hard and locking up the 
wheels. Skids also can occur when using the speed 
retarder when the road is slippery. 
 
Over-steering. Turning the wheels more sharply 
than the vehicle can turn. 
 
Over-acceleration. Supplying too much power to 
the drive wheels, causing them to spin. 
 
Driving Too Fast. Most serious skids result from 
driving too fast for road conditions. Drivers who 
adjust their driving to conditions don't over -
accelerate and don't have to over -brake or over -
steer from too much speed. 
 
--- PAGE 64 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-37 
Version: July 2017 
2.19.1 – Drive-wheel Skids 
By far the most common skid is one in which the 
rear wheels lose traction through excessive braking 
or acceleration. Skids caused by acceleration 
usually happen on ice or snow. Taking your foot off 
the accelerator can easily stop them. (If it is very 
slippery, push the clutch in. Otherwise, the engine 
can keep the wheels from rolling freely and 
regaining traction.)  
Rear wheel braking skids occur when the rear drive 
wheels lock. Because locked wheels have less 
traction than rolling wheels, the rear wheels usually 
slide sideways in an attempt to "catch up" with the 
front wheels. In a bus or straight truck, the vehicle 
will slide sideways in a "spin out." With vehicle s 
towing trailers, a drive-wheel skid can let the trailer 
push the towing vehicle sideways, causing a 
sudden jackknife. See Figure 2.19. 
2.19.2 – Correcting a Drive-wheel Braking Skid 
Do the following to correct a drive-wheel braking 
skid. 
Stop Braking. This will let the rear wheels roll 
again, and keep the rear wheels from sliding.  
Counter-steer. As a vehicle turns back on course, 
it has a tendency to keep on turning. Unless you turn 
the steering wheel quickly the other way, you may 
find yourself skidding in the opposite direction. 
Learning to stay off the brake, turn the steering 
wheel quickly, push in the clutch, and counter-steer 
in a skid takes a lot of practice. The best place to 
get this practice is on a large driving range or "skid 
pad." 
2.19.3 – Front-wheel Skids 
Driving too fast for conditions causes most front-
wheel skids. Other causes include lack of tread on 
the front tires and cargo loaded so not enough 
weight is on the front axle. In a front-wheel skid, the 
front end tends to go in a straight line regardless of 
how much you turn the steering wheel. On a very 
slippery surface, you may not be able to steer 
around a curve or turn. 
When a front-wheel skid occurs, the only way to 
stop the skid is to let the vehicle slow down. Stop 
turning and/or braking so hard. Slow down as 
quickly as possible without skidding. 
Figure 2.19 
Subsections 2.17, 2.18, and 2.19 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. Stopping is not always the safest thing to do
in an emergency. True or False?
2. What are some advantages of going right
instead of left around an obstacle?
3. What is an "escape ramp?"
4. If a tire blows out, you should put the brakes
on hard to stop quickly. True or False?
5. How do you know if your vehicle has antilock
brakes?
6. What is the proper braking technique when
driving a vehicle with antilock brakes?
7. How do antilock brakes help you?
These questions may be on the test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.17, 2.18, 
and 2.19. 

--- PAGE 65 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-38  
Version: July 2017 
 
2.20 – Accident Procedures 
When you're in an accident and not seriously hurt, 
you need to act to prevent further damage or injury. 
The basic steps to be taken at any accident are to: 
Protect the area. 
Notify authorities. 
Care for the injured. 
2.20.1 – Protect the Area 
The first thing to do at an accident scene is to keep 
another accident from happening in the same spot. 
To protect the accident area: 
If your vehicle is involved in the accident, try to get 
it to the side of the road. This will help prevent 
another accident and allow traffic to move. 
If you're stopping to help, park away from the 
accident. The area immediately around the 
accident will be needed for emergency vehicles. 
Put on your flashers. 
Set out reflective triangles to warn other traffic. 
Make sure other drivers can see them in time to 
avoid the accident. 
 
2.20.2 – Notify Authorities 
If you have a cell phone or CB, call for assistance 
before you get out of your vehicle. If not, wait until 
after the accident scene has been properly 
protected, then phone or send someone to phone 
the police. Try to determine where you are so you  
can give the exact location. 
 
2.20.3 – Care for the Injured 
If a qualified person is at the accident and helping 
the injured, stay out of the way unless asked to 
assist. Otherwise, do the best you can to help any 
injured parties. Here are some simple steps to follow 
in giving assistance: 
Don't move a severely injured person unless the 
danger of fire or passing traffic makes it necessary. 
Stop heavy bleeding by applying direct pressure to 
the wound. 
Keep the injured person warm. 
2.21 – Fires 
Truck fires can cause damage and injury. Learn the 
causes of fires and how to prevent them. Know what 
to do to extinguish fires. 
 
2.21.1 – Causes of Fire 
The following are some causes of vehicle fires: 
After Accidents. Spilled fuel, improper use of 
flares. 
Tires. Under-inflated tires and duals that touch. 
Electrical System. Short circuits due to damaged 
insulation, loose connections. 
Fuel. Driver smoking, improper fueling, loose fuel 
connections. 
Cargo. Flammable cargo, improperly sealed or 
loaded cargo, poor ventilation. 
 
2.21.2 – Fire Prevention 
Pay attention to the following: 
Vehicle Inspection. Make a complete inspection 
of the electrical, fuel, and exhaust systems, tires, 
and cargo. Be sure to check that the fire 
extinguisher is charged. 
En Route Inspection. Check the tires, wheels, 
and truck body for signs of heat whenever you stop 
during a trip. 
Follow Safe Procedures. Follow correct safety 
procedures for fueling the vehicle, using brakes, 
handling flares, and other activities that can cause 
a fire. 
Monitoring. Check the instruments and gauges 
often for signs of overheating and use the mirrors 
to look for signs of smoke from tires or the vehicle. 
Caution. Use normal caution in handling anything 
flammable. 
 
2.21.3 – Fire Fighting 
Knowing how to fight fires is important. Drivers who 
didn’t know what to do have made fires worse. Know 
how the fire extinguisher works. Study the 
instructions printed on the extinguisher before you 
need it. Here are some procedures to follow in case 
of fire. 
 
Pull Off the Road. The first step is to get the vehicle 
off the road and stop. In doing so: 
Park in an open area, away from buildings, trees, 
brush, other vehicles, or anything that might catch 
fire. 
Don't pull into a service station! 
Notify emergency services of your problem and 
your location. 
 
Keep the Fire from Spreading. Before trying to put 
out the fire, make sure that it doesn't spread any 
further. 
With an engine fire, turn off the engine as soon as 
you can. Don't open the hood if you can avoid it. 
--- PAGE 66 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-39 
Version: July 2017 
Shoot foam through louvers, radiator, or from the 
vehicle’s underside.
For a cargo fire in a van or box trailer, keep the 
doors shut, especially if your cargo contains 
hazardous materials. Opening the van doors will 
supply the fire with oxygen and can cause it to 
burn very fast. 
Extinguish the Fire. Here are some rules to follow 
in putting out a fire: 
When using the extinguisher, stay as far away from 
the fire as possible. 
Aim at the source or base of the fire, not up in the 
flames. 
Use the Right Fire Extinguisher 
Figures 2.20 and 2.21 detail the type of fire 
extinguisher to use by class of fire. 
The B:C type fire extinguisher is designed to work 
on electrical fires and burning liquids.  
The A:B:C type is designed to work on burning 
wood, paper, and cloth as well. 
Water can be used on wood, paper, or cloth, but 
don't use water on an electrical fire (can cause 
shock) or a gasoline fire (it will spread the flames). 
A burning tire must be cooled. Lots of water may 
be required. 
If you're not sure what to use, especially on a 
hazardous materials fire, wait for firefighters. 
Position yourself upwind. Let the wind carry the 
extinguisher to the fire. 
Continue until whatever was burning has been 
cooled. Absence of smoke or flame does not mean 
the fire cannot restart. 
Class/Type of Fires 
Class Type 
A Wood, Paper, Ordinary Combustibles 
Extinguish by Cooling and 
Quenching Using Water or Dry 
Chemicals 
B Gasoline, Oil, Grease, Other Greasy 
Liquids 
Extinguish by Smothering, Cooling 
or Heat Shielding using carbon 
Dioxide or Dry Chemicals  
C Electrical Equipment Fires 
Extinguish with Non-conducting 
Agents such as Carbon Dioxide or 
Dry Chemicals. DO NOT USE 
WATER. 
D Fires in Combustible Metals 
Extinguish by Using Specialized 
Extinguishing Powders 
Figure 2.20 
Class of Fire/Type of Extinguisher 
Class of Fire Fire Extinguisher Type 
B or C Regular Dry Chemical 
A, B, C, or D Multi-Purpose Dry Chemical 
D Purple K Dry Chemical 
B or C KCL Dry Chemical 
D Dry Powder Special 
Compound 
B or C Carbon Dioxide (Dry) 
B or C Halogenated Agent (Gas) 
A Water 
A Water With Anti-Freeze 
A or B Water, Loaded Steam Style 
B, On Some A Foam 
Figure 2.21 
--- PAGE 67 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-40  
Version: July 2017 
 
 
Subsections 2.20 and 2.21 
Test Your Knowledge 
 
1. What are some things to do at an accident 
scene to prevent another accident? 
2. Name two causes of tire fires. 
3. What k inds of fires is a B:C extinguisher not 
good for? 
4. When using your extinguisher, should you get 
as close as possible to the fire? 
5. Name some causes of vehicle fires. 
 
These questions may be on the test. If you can't 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.20 and 2.21. 
 
 
2.22 – Alcohol, Other Drugs, and 
Driving 
 
2.22.1 – Alcohol and Driving 
Drinking alcohol and then driving is very dangerous 
and a serious problem. People who drink alcohol 
are involved in traffic accidents resulting in over 
20,000 deaths every y ear. Alcohol impairs muscle 
coordination, reaction time, depth perception, and 
night vision. It also affects the parts of the brain that 
control judgment and inhibition. For some people, 
one drink is all it takes to show signs of impairment. 
How Alcohol Works. Alcohol goes directly into the 
blood stream and is carried to the brain. After 
passing through the brain, a small percentage is 
removed in urine, perspiration, and by breathing, 
while the rest is carried to the liver. The liver can 
only process one-third an ounce of alcohol per hour, 
which is considerably less than the alcohol in a 
standard drink. This is a fixed rate, so only time, not 
black coffee or a cold shower, will sober you up. If 
you have drinks faster than your body can get rid of 
them, you will have more alcohol in your bod y, and 
your driving will be more affected. The Blood 
Alcohol Concentration (BAC) commonly measures 
the amount of alcohol in your body. See Figure 2.22. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.22 
 
What Is a Drink? 
It is the alcohol in drinks that affects human 
performance. It doesn't make any difference 
whether that alcohol comes from "a couple of 
beers,” or from two glasses of wine, or two shots 
of hard liquor.  Approximate Blood Alcohol 
Content 
Drinks 
Body Weight in Pounds 
Effects 
 
100 
120 
140 
160 
180 
200 
220 
240 
 
0 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 
Only Safe 
Driving Limit 
1 .04 .03 .03 .02 .02 .02 .02 .02 
Impairment 
Begins 
2 .08 .06 .05 .05 .04 .04 .03 .03 
Driving Skills Significantly 
Affected 
Criminal Penalties 
3 .11 .09 .08 .07 .06 .06 .05 .05 
4 .15 .12 .11 .09 .08 .08 .07 .06 
5 .19 .16 .13 .12 .11 .09 .09 .08 
6 .23 .19 .16 .14 .13 .11 .10 .09 
7 .26 .22 .19 .16 .15 .13 .12 .11 
Legally Intoxicated 
Criminal Penalties 
8 .30 .25 .21 .19 .17 .15 .14 .13 
9 .34 .28 .24 .21 .19 .17 .15 .14 
1
0 .38 .31 .27 .23 .21 .19 .17 .16 
Subtract .01% for each 40 minutes of drinking. One 
drink is 1.5 oz. of 80 proof liquor, 12 oz. of beer, or 5 
oz. of table wine. 
--- PAGE 68 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-41 
Version: July 2017 
All of the following drinks contain the same amount 
of alcohol: 
A 12-ounce glass of 5% beer. 
A 5-ounce glass of 12% wine. 
A 1 1/2-ounce shot of 80 proof liquor. 
What Determines Blood Alcohol Concentration? 
BAC is determined by the amount of alcohol you 
drink (more alcohol means higher BAC), how fast 
you drink (faster drinking means higher BAC), and 
your weight (a small person doesn't have to drink as 
much to reach the same BAC). 
Alcohol and the Brain. Alcohol affects more and 
more of the brain as BAC builds up. The first part of 
the brain affected controls judgment and self-
control. One of the bad things about this is it can 
keep drinkers from knowing they are getting drunk. 
And, of course, good judgment and self-control are 
absolutely necessary for safe driving. 
As BAC continues to build up, muscle control, 
vision, and coordination are affected more and 
more. Effects on driving may include:  
Straddling lanes. 
Quick, jerky starts. 
Not signaling, failure to use lights. 
Running stop signs and red lights. 
Improper passing (See Figure 2.23). 
These effects mean increased chances of a crash 
and chances of losing your driver's license. Accident 
statistics show that the chance of a crash is much 
greater for drivers who have been drinking than for 
drivers who have not. 
How Alcohol Affects Driving. All drivers are 
affected by drinking alcohol. Alcohol affects 
judgment, vision, coordination, and reaction time. It 
causes serious driving errors, such as: 
Increased reaction time to hazards. 
Driving too fast or too slow. 
Driving in the wrong lane. 
Running over the curb. 
Weaving. 
Figure 2.23 
2.22.2 – Other Drugs 
Besides alcohol, other legal and illegal drugs are 
being used more often. Laws prohibit possession or 
use of many drugs while on duty. They prohibit 
being under the influence of any "controlled 
substance," amphetamines (including "pep pills," 
“uppers,” and "bennies"), narcotics, or any other 
substance, which can make the driver unsafe. This 
could include a variety of prescription and over-the-
counter drugs (cold medicines), which may make 
the driver drowsy or otherwise affect safe driving 
ability. However, possession and use of a drug 
given to a driver by a doctor is permitted if the doctor 
informs the driver that it will not affect safe driving 
ability. 
Effects Of Increasing  
Blood Alcohol Content 
Blood Alcohol Content is the amount of alcohol in 
your blood recorded in milligrams of alcohol per 
100 milliliters of blood. Your BAC depends on the 
amount of blood (which increases with weight) and 
the amount of alcohol you consume over time (how 
fast you drink). The faster you drink, the higher your 
BAC, as the liver can only handle about one drink 
per hour—the rest builds up in your blood. 
BAC Effects on Body Effects on 
Driving Condition 
.02 Mellow feeling, 
slight body warmth. Less inhibited. 
.05 Noticeable 
relaxation. 
Less alert, less 
self-focused, 
coordination 
impairment begins. 
.08 
Definite impairment 
in coordination & 
judgment  
Drunk driving limit, 
impaired 
coordination & 
judgment. 
.10* 
Noisy, possible 
embarrassing 
behavior, mood 
swings. 
Reduction in 
reaction time. 
.15 
Impaired balance & 
movement, clearly 
drunk. 
Unable to drive. 
.30 Many lose 
consciousness. 
.40 
Most lose 
consciousness, 
some die. 
.50 Breathing stops, 
many die. 
BAC of .10 means that 1/10 of 1 % (o r 1/1000) of 
your total blood content is alcohol. 
--- PAGE 69 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-42  
Version: July 2017 
 
Pay attention to wa rning labels for legitimate drugs 
and medicines, and to doctor's orders regarding 
possible effects. Stay away from illegal drugs.  
Don't use any drug that hides fatigue--the only cure 
for fatigue is rest. Alcohol can make the effects of 
other drugs much worse. The safest rule is don't mix 
drugs with driving at all. 
 
Use of drugs can lead to traffic accidents resulting 
in death, injury, and property damage. Furthermore, 
it can lead to arrest, fines, and jail sentences. It can 
also mean the end of a person's driving career. 
 
2.22.3 – Illness 
Once in a while, you may become so ill that you 
cannot operate a motor vehicle safely. If this 
happens to you, you must not drive. However, in 
case of an emergency, you may drive to the nearest 
place where you can safely stop. 
 
 
2.23 – Hazardous Materials Rules For 
All Commercial Drivers 
 
All drivers should know something about hazardous 
materials. You must be able to recognize hazardous 
cargo, and you must know whether or not you can 
haul it without having a hazardous mate rials 
endorsement on your CDL license. 
 
2.23.1 – What Are Hazardous Materials? 
Hazardous materials are products that pose a risk 
to health, safety, and property during transportation. 
See Figure 2.24. 
 
2.23.2 – Why Are There Rules? 
You must follow the many  rules about transporting 
hazardous materials. The intent of the rules is to:  
Contain the product. 
Communicate the risk. 
Ensure safe drivers and equipment. 
To Contain the Product. Many hazardous 
products can injure or kill on contact. To protect 
drivers a nd others from contact, the rules tell 
shippers how to package safely. Similar rules tell 
drivers how to load, transport, and unload bulk 
tanks. These are containment rules. 
To Communicate the Risk. The shipper uses a 
shipping paper and diamond shaped hazard labels 
to warn dockworkers and drivers of the risk. 
Figure 2.24 
After an accident or hazardous material spill or leak, 
you may be injured and unable to communicate the 
hazards of the materials you are transporting. 
Firefighters and police can prevent or reduce the 
amount of damage or injury at the scene if they 
know what hazardous materials are being 
transported. Your life, and the lives of others, may 
depend on quickly locating the hazardous materials 
shipping papers. For that reason, you must identify 
shipping papers related to hazardous materials or 
keep them on top of other shipping papers. You 
must also keep shipping papers: 
In a pouch on the driver's door, or 
In clear view within reach while driving, or 
On the driver's seat when out of the vehicle. 
 
2.23.3 – Lists of Regulated Products 
Placards are used to warn others of hazardous 
materials. Placards are signs put on the outside of 
a vehicle that identify the hazard class of the cargo. 
A placarded vehicle must have at least four identical 
placards. They are put on the front, rear, and both 
sides. 
Hazard Class Definitions 
Class Class Name Example 
1 Explosives 
Ammunition, 
Dynamite, 
Fireworks 
2 Gases Propane, Oxygen, 
Helium 
3 Flammable  Gasoline, Acetone 
4 Flammable 
Solids Matches, Fuses 
5 Oxidizers 
Ammonium 
Nitrate, Hydrogen 
Peroxide 
6 Poisons Pesticides, 
Arsenic 
7 Radioactive Uranium, 
Plutonium 
8 Corrosives Hydrochloric Acid, 
Battery  Fluid 
9 
Miscellaneous 
Hazardous 
Materials 
Formaldehyde, 
Asbestos 
None 
ORM-D (Other 
Regulated 
Material-
Domestic) 
Hair Spray or 
Charcoal 
None Combustible 
Liquids 
Fuel Oils, Lighter 
Fluid 
--- PAGE 70 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 2 – Driving Safely Page 2-43  
Version: July 2017 
 
Placards must be readable from all four directions. 
They must be at least 9.8” (250mm) inches square, 
turned upright on a point, in a diamond shape. 
Cargo tanks and other  bulk packaging display the 
identification number of their contents on placards 
or orange panels. 
 
Identification Numbers are a four digit code used 
by first responders to identify hazardous materials. 
An identification number may be used to identify 
more than one chemical on shipping papers. The 
identification number will be preceded by the letters 
“NA” or “UN”. The US DOT Emergency Response 
Guidebook (ERG) lists the chemicals and the 
identification numbers assigned to them. 
 
Not all vehicles carrying haza rdous materials need 
to have placards. The rules about placards are 
given in Section 9 of this manual. You can drive a 
vehicle that carries hazardous materials if it does 
not require placards. If it requires placards, you 
cannot drive it unless your driver  license has the 
hazardous materials endorsement. See Figure 
2.25. 
 
 
The rules require all drivers of placarded vehicles to 
learn how to safely load and transport hazardous 
products. They must have a commercial driver 
license with the hazardous materials endorsement. 
To get the required endorsement, you must pass a 
written test on material found in Section 9 of this 
manual. A tank endorsement is required for any 
commercial vehicle that is designed to transport any 
liquid or gaseous materials in a tank or tanks having 
an individual rated capacity of more than 119 
gallons and an aggregate capacity of 1,000 gallons 
or more that is either permanently or temporarily 
attached to the vehicle or chassis.  The liquid or gas 
does not have to be a hazardous material.  
 
Drivers who need the hazardous materials 
endorsement must learn the placard rules. If you do 
not know if your vehicle needs placards, ask your 
employer. Never drive a vehicle needing placards 
unless you have the hazardous materials 
endorsement. To do so is a crime. When stopped, 
you will be cited and you will not be allowed to drive 
your truck.  It will cost you time and money. A failure 
to placard when needed may risk your life and 
others if you have an accident. Emergency help will 
not know of your hazardous cargo. 
Hazardous materials drivers must also know which 
products they can load together, and which they 
cannot. These rules are also in Section 9. Before 
loading a truck with more than one type of product, 
you must know if it is safe to load them tog ether. If 
you do not know, ask your employer and consult the 
regulations. 
 
 
 
Subsections 2.22 and 2.23 
Test Your Knowledge 
 
1. Common medicines for colds can make you 
sleepy. True or False? 
2. Coffee and a little fresh air will help a drinker 
sober up. True or False? 
3. What is a hazardous materials placard? 
4. Why are placards used? 
 
These questions may be on the test. If you can't 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.22 and 
2.23. 
 
 
 
                          Figure 2.25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 71 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
