Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely Page 3-1 
Version: July 2017 
Section 3  
TRANSPORTING CARGO 
SAFELY 
This Section Covers 
 Inspecting Cargo
 Cargo Weight and Balance
 Securing Cargo
 Cargo Needing Special Attention
This section tells you about hauling cargo safely. 
You must understand basic cargo safety rules to get 
a CDL. 
If you load cargo wrong or do not secure it, it can be 
a danger to others and yourself. Loose cargo that 
falls off a vehicle can cause traffic problems and 
others could be hurt or killed. Loose cargo could hurt 
or kill you during a quick stop or crash. Your vehicle 
could be damaged by an overload. Steering could 
be affected by how a vehicle is loaded, making it 
more difficult to control the vehicle. 
Whether or not you load and secure the cargo 
yourself, you are responsible for: 
Inspecting your cargo. 
Recognizing overloads and poorly balanced 
weight. 
Knowing your cargo is properly secured and does 
not obscure your view ahead or to the sides. 
Knowing your cargo does not restrict your access 
to emergency equipment. 
If you intend to carry hazardous material that 
requires placards on your vehicle, you will also need 
to have a hazardous materials endorsement. 
Section 9 of this manual has the information you 
need to pass the hazardous materials test. 
3.1 – Inspecting Cargo 
As part of your Vehicle inspection, make sure the 
truck is not overloaded and the cargo is balanced 
and secured properly. 
After Starting. Inspect the cargo and its securing 
devices again within the first 50 miles after 
beginning a trip. Make any adjustments needed.  
Re-check. Re-check the cargo and securing 
devices as often as necessary during a trip to keep 
the load secure. You need to inspect again: 
After you have driven for 3 hours or 150 miles. 
After every break you take during driving. 
Federal, state, and local regulations for commercial 
vehicle weight, securing cargo, covering loads, and 
where you can drive large vehicles vary from place 
to place. Know the rules where you will be driving. 
3.2 – Weight and Balance 
You are responsible for not being overloaded. The 
following are some definitions of weight you should 
know. 
3.2.1 – Definitions You Should Know 
Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR). The value 
specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight 
of a single vehicle. 
Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR). The 
value specified by the manufacturer of the power 
unit, if the value is displayed on the Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS) certification 
label; or the sum of the gross vehicle weight ratings 
(GVWRs) or the gross vehicle weights (GVWs) of 
the power unit and the towed unit(s), or any 
combination thereof, that produces the highest 
value. 
(The underlined and italicized text above is for 
use by roadside enforcement only to determine 
whether the driver/vehicle is subject to CDL 
regulations.  
It is not used to determine whether 
a vehicle is representative for the purposes of 
Skills testing). 
Axle Weight. The weight transmitted to the ground 
by one axle or one set of axles. 
Tire Load. The maximum safe weight a tire can 
carry at a specified pressure. This rating is stated on 
the side of each tire. 
Suspension Systems. Suspension systems have 
a manufacturer's weight capacity rating. 
Coupling Device Capacity. Coupling devices are 
rated for the maximum weight they can pull and/or 
carry. 
3.2.2 – Legal Weight Limits 
You must keep weights within legal limits. States 
have maximums for GVWRs, GCWRs, and axle 
weights. Often, maximum axle weights are set by a 
bridge formula. A bridge formula permits less 
maximum axle weight for axles that are closer 
--- PAGE 72 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely Page 3-2  
Version: July 2017 
together. This is to prevent overloading bridges and 
roadways. 
Overloading can have bad effects on steering, 
braking, and speed control. Overloaded trucks have 
to go very slowly on upgrades. Worse, they may 
gain too much speed on downgrades. Stopping 
distance increases. Bra kes can fail when forced to 
work too hard. 
 
During bad weather or in mountains, it may not be 
safe to operate at legal maximum weights. Take this 
into account before driving. 
 
3.2.3 – Don't Be Top-heavy 
The height of the vehicle's center of gravity is very  
important for safe handling. A high center of gravity 
(cargo piled up high or heavy cargo on top) means 
you are more likely to tip over. It is most dangerous 
in curves, or if you have to swerve to avoid a hazard. 
It is very important to distribute the car go so it is as 
low as possible. Put the heaviest parts of the cargo 
under the lightest parts. 
 
3.2.4 – Balance the Weight 
Poor weight balance can make vehicle handling 
unsafe. Too much weight on the steering axle can 
cause hard steering. It can damage the steering 
axle and tires. Under-loaded front axles (caused by 
shifting weight too far to the rear) can make the 
steering axle weight too light to steer safely. Too 
little weight on the driving axles can cause poor 
traction. The drive wheels may spin easily.  During 
bad weather, the truck may not be able to keep 
going. Weight that is loaded so there is a high center 
of gravity causes greater chance of rollover. On flat 
bed vehicles, there is also a greater chance that the 
load will shift to the side or fall off. See Figure 3.1. 
 
 
3.3 – Securing Cargo 
 
3.3.1 – Blocking and Bracing 
Blocking is used in the front, back, and/or sides of a 
piece of cargo to keep it from sliding. Blocking is 
shaped to fit snugly against cargo. It is secured to 
the cargo deck to prevent cargo movement. Bracing 
is also used to prevent movement of cargo. Bracing 
goes from the upper part of the cargo to the floor 
and/or walls of the cargo compartment. 
 
 
Figure 3.1 
 
3.3.2 – Cargo Tie-down 
On flatbed trailers or trailers without sides, carg o 
must be secured to keep it from shifting or falling off. 
In closed vans, tie -downs can also be important to 
prevent cargo shifting that may affect the handling 
of the vehicle. Tie-downs must be of the proper type 
and proper strength. Federal regulations require the 
aggregate working load limit of any securement 
system used to secure an article or group of articles 
against movement must be at least one-half times 
the weight of the article or group of articles . Proper 
tie-down equipment must be used, includ ing ropes, 
straps, chains, and tensioning devices (winches, 
ratchets, clinching components). Tie -downs must 
be attached to the vehicle correctly (hooks, bolts, 
rails, rings). See figure 3.2. 
 
 
Figure 3.2 
 
 

--- PAGE 73 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely Page 3-3 
Version: July 2017 
Cargo should have at least one tie-down for each 
ten feet of cargo. Make sure you have enough tie-
downs to meet this need. No matter how small the 
cargo, it should have at least two tie-downs. 
There are special requirements for securing various 
heavy pieces of metal. Find out what they are if you 
are to carry such loads. 
3.3.3 – Header Boards 
Front-end header boards ("headache racks") 
protect you from your cargo in case of a crash or 
emergency stop. Make sure the front-end structure 
is in good condition. The front-end structure should 
block the forward movement of any cargo you carry. 
3.3.4 – Covering Cargo 
There are two basic reasons for covering cargo: 
To protect people from spilled cargo. 
To protect the cargo from weather. 
Spill protection is a safety requirement in many 
states. Be familiar with the laws in the states you 
drive in. 
You should look at your cargo covers in the mirrors 
from time to time while driving. A flapping cover can 
tear loose, uncovering the cargo, and possibly block 
your view or someone else's. 
3.3.5 – Sealed and Containerized Loads 
Containerized loads generally are used when freight 
is carried part way by rail or ship. Delivery by truck 
occurs at the beginning and/or end of the journey. 
Some containers have their own tiedown devices or 
locks that attach directly to a special frame. Others 
have to be loaded onto flatbed trailers. They must 
be properly secured just like any other cargo. 
You cannot inspect sealed loads, but you should 
check that you don't exceed gross weight and axle 
weight limits. 
3.4 – Cargo Needing Special Attention 
3.4.1 – Dry Bulk 
Dry bulk tanks require special care because they 
have a high center of gravity, and the load can shift. 
Be extremely cautious (slow and careful) going 
around curves and making sharp turns. 
3.4.2 – Hanging Meat 
Hanging meat (suspended beef, pork, lamb) in a 
refrigerated truck can be a very unstable load with a 
high center of gravity. Particular caution is needed 
on sharp curves such as off ramps and on ramps. 
Go slowly. 
3.4.3 – Livestock 
Livestock can move around in a trailer, causing 
unsafe handling. With less than a full load, use false 
bulkheads to keep livestock bunched together. 
Even when bunched, special care is necessary 
because livestock can lean on curves. This shifts 
the center of gravity and makes rollover more likely. 
3.4.4 – Oversized Loads 
Over-length, over-width, and/or overweight loads 
require special transit permits. Driving is usually 
limited to certain times. Special equipment may be 
necessary such as "wide load" signs, flashing lights, 
flags, etc. Such loads may require a police escort or 
pilot vehicles bearing warning signs and/or flashing 
lights. These special loads require special driving 
care. 
Section 3 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. What four things related to cargo are drivers
responsible for?
2. How often must you stop while on the road to
check your cargo?
3. How is Gross Combination Weight Rating
different from Gross Combination Weight?
4. Name two situations where legal maximum
weights may not be safe.
5. What can happen if you don't have enough
weight on the front axle?
6. What is the minimum number of tie-downs for
any flatbed load?
7. What is the minimum number of tie-downs for a
20-foot load?
8. Name the two basic reasons for covering cargo
on an open bed.
9. What must you check before transporting a
sealed load?
These questions may be on your test. If you can't 
answer them all, re-read Section 3. 
--- PAGE 74 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
