Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely Page 4-1 
Version: July 2017 
Section 4 
TRANSPORTING 
PASSENGERS SAFELY 
This Section Covers 
 Vehicle Inspection
 Loading
 On the Road
 After-trip Vehicle Inspection
 Prohibited Practices
 Use of Brake-door Interlocks
Bus drivers must have a commercial driver license 
if they drive a vehicle designed to seat more than 16 
or more persons, including the driver.  
Bus drivers must have a passenger endorsement 
on their commercial driver license. To get the 
endorsement you must pass a knowledge test on 
Sections 2 and 4 of this manual. (If your bus has air 
brakes, you must also pass a knowledge test on 
Section 5.) You must also pass the skills tests 
required for the class of vehicle you drive.  
4.1 – Vehicle Inspection 
Before driving your bus, you must be sure it is safe. 
You must review the inspection report made by the 
previous driver. Only if defects reported earlier have 
been certified as repaired or not needed to be 
repaired, should you sign the previous driver's 
report. This is your certification that the defects 
reported earlier have been fixed. 
4.1.1 – Vehicle Systems 
Make sure these things are in good working order 
before driving: 
Service brakes, including air hose couplings (if 
your bus has a trailer or semitrailer). 
Parking brake. 
Steering mechanism. 
Lights and reflectors. 
Tires (front wheels must not have recapped or re-
grooved tires). 
Horn. 
Windshield wiper or wipers. 
Rear-vision mirror or mirrors. 
Coupling devices (if present). 
Wheels and rims. 
Emergency equipment. 
Make sure your bus has the fire extinguisher and 
emergency reflectors (3 reflective triangles or at 
least 6 fusees or 3 liquid burning flares) required 
by law. The bus must also have spare electrical 
fuses, unless equipped with circuit breakers. 
4.1.2 – Access Doors and Panels 
As you check the outside of the bus, close any open 
emergency exits. Also, close any open access 
panels (for baggage, restroom service, engine, etc.) 
before driving. 
4.1.3 – Bus Interior 
People sometimes damage unattended buses. 
Always check the interior of the bus before driving 
to ensure rider safety. Aisles and stairwells should 
always be clear. The following parts of your bus 
must be in safe working condition:  
Each handhold and railing. 
Floor covering. 
Signaling devices, including the restroom 
emergency buzzer, if the bus has a restroom. 
Emergency exit handles. 
The seats must be safe for riders. All seats must be 
securely fastened to the bus. 
Never drive with an open emergency exit door or 
window. The "Emergency Exit" sign on an 
emergency door must be clearly visible. If there is a 
red emergency door light, it must work. Turn it on at 
night or any other time you use your outside lights. 
4.1.4 – Roof Hatches 
You may lock some emergency roof hatches in a 
partly open position for fresh air. Do not leave them 
open as a regular practice. Keep in mind the bus's 
higher clearance while driving with them open. 
4.1.5 – Use Your Seatbelt! 
The driver's seat should have a seat belt. Always 
use it for safety. 
4.2 – Loading and Trip Start 
Do not allow riders to leave carry-on baggage in a 
doorway or aisle. There should be nothing in the 
aisle that might trip other riders. Secure baggage 
and freight in ways that avoid damage and: 
Allow the driver to move freely and easily. 
--- PAGE 75 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely Page 4-2 
Version: July 2017 
Allow riders to exit by any window or door in an 
emergency. 
Protect riders from injury if carry-ons fall or shift. 
4.2.1 – Hazardous Materials 
Watch for cargo or baggage containing hazardous 
materials. Most hazardous materials cannot be 
carried on a bus. 
The Federal Hazardous Materials Table shows 
which materials are hazardous. They pose a risk to 
health, safety, and property during transportation. 
The rules require shippers to mark containers of 
hazardous material with the material's name, 
identification number, and hazard label. There are 
nine different four-inch, diamond-shaped hazard 
labels. See Figure 4.1. Watch for the diamond-
shaped labels. Do not transport any hazardous 
material unless you are sure the rules allow it. 
Figure 4.1 
4.2.2 – Forbidden Hazardous Materials 
Buses may carry small-arms ammunition labeled 
ORM-D, emergency hospital supplies, and drugs. 
You can carry small amounts of some other 
hazardous materials if the shipper cannot send 
them any other way. Buses must never carry: 
Division 2.3 poison gas, liquid Class 6 poison, tear 
gas, irritating material. 
More than 100 pounds of solid Class 6 poisons. 
Explosives in the space occupied by people, 
except small arms ammunition. 
Labeled radioactive materials in the space 
occupied by people. 
More than 500 pounds total of allowed hazardous 
materials, and no more than 100 pounds of any 
one class. 
Riders sometimes board a bus with an unlabeled 
hazardous material. Do not allow riders to carry on 
common hazards such as car batteries or gasoline. 
4.2.3 – Standee Line 
No rider may stand forward of the rear of the driver's 
seat. Buses designed to allow standing must have 
a two-inch line on the floor or some other means of 
showing riders where they cannot stand. This is 
called the standee line. All standing riders must stay 
behind it. 
4.2.4 – At Your Destination 
When arriving at the destination or intermediate 
stops announce: 
The location. 
Reason for stopping. 
Next departure time. 
Bus number. 
Remind riders to take carry-ons with them if they get 
off the bus. If the aisle is on a lower level than the 
seats, remind riders of the step-down. It is best to 
tell them before coming to a complete stop. 
Charter bus drivers should not allow riders on the 
bus until departure time. This will help prevent theft 
or vandalism of the bus. 
4.3 – On the Road 
4.3.1 – Passenger Supervision 
Many charter and intercity carriers have passenger 
comfort and safety rules. Mention rules about 
smoking, drinking, or use of radio and tape players 
at the start of the trip. Explaining the rules at the 
start will help to avoid trouble later on. 
While driving, scan the interior of your bus as well 
as the road ahead, to the sides, and to the rear. You 
Hazard Class Definitions 
Class Class Name Example 
1 Explosives 
Ammunition, 
Dynamite, 
Fireworks 
2 Gases Propane, Oxygen, 
Helium 
3 Flammable Gasoline, 
Acetone 
4 Flammable 
Solids Matches, Fuses 
5 Oxidizers 
Ammonium 
Nitrate, Hydrogen 
Peroxide 
6 Poisons Pesticides, 
Arsenic 
7 Radioactive Uranium, 
Plutonium 
8 Corrosives Hydrochloric Acid, 
Battery Acid 
9 
Miscellaneous 
Hazardous 
Materials 
Formaldehyde, 
Asbestos 
None 
ORM-D (Other 
Regulated 
Material-
Domestic) 
Hair Spray or 
Charcoal 
None Combustible 
Liquids 
Fuel Oils, Lighter 
Fluid 
--- PAGE 76 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely Page 4-3 
Version: July 2017 
may have to remi nd riders about rules, or to keep 
arms and heads inside the bus. 
 
4.3.2 – At Stops 
Riders can stumble when getting on or off, and 
when the bus starts or stops. Caution riders to watch 
their step when leaving the bus. Wait for them to sit 
down or brace them selves before starting. Starting 
and stopping should be as smooth as possible to 
avoid rider injury. 
 
Occasionally, you may have a drunk or disruptive 
rider. You must ensure this rider's safety as well as 
that of others. Don't discharge such riders where i t 
would be unsafe for them. It may be safer at the next 
scheduled stop or a well -lighted area where there 
are other people. Many carriers have guidelines for 
handling disruptive riders. 
 
4.3.3 – Common Accidents 
The Most Common Bus Accidents. Bus accidents 
often happen at intersections. Use caution, even if 
a signal or stop sign controls other traffic. School 
and mass transit buses sometimes scrape off 
mirrors or hit passing vehicles when pulling out from 
a bus stop. Remember the clearance your bus 
needs, and watch for poles and tree limbs at stops. 
Know the size of the gap your bus needs to 
accelerate and merge with traffic. Wait for the gap 
to open before leaving the stop. Never assume 
other drivers will brake to give you room when you 
signal or start to pull out. 
 
4.3.4 – Speed on Curves 
Crashes on curves that kill people and destroy 
buses result from excessive speed, often when rain 
or snow has made the road slippery. Every banked 
curve has a safe "design speed." In good weather, 
the posted speed is safe for cars but it may be too 
high for many buses. With good traction, the bus 
may roll over; with poor traction, it might slide off the 
curve. Reduce speed for curves! If your bus leans 
toward the outside on a banked curve, you are 
driving too fast. 
 
4.3.5 – Railroad-highway Crossing/ Stops 
Stop at RR Crossings: 
Stop your bus between 15 and 50 feet before 
railroad crossings.  
Listen and look in both directions for trains. You 
should open your forward door if it improves your 
ability to see or hear an approaching train.  
Before crossing after a train has passed, make sure 
there isn't another train coming in the other direction 
on other tracks.  
If your bus has a manual transmission, never 
change gears while crossing the tracks. 
You do not have to stop, but must  slow down and 
carefully check for other vehicles: 
At streetcar crossings. 
Where a policeman or flagman is directing traffic. 
If a traffic signal is green. 
At crossings marked as "exempt" or "abandoned." 
 
4.3.6 – Drawbridges 
Stop at Drawbridges. Stop at drawbridges that do 
not have a signal light or traffic control attendant. 
Stop at least 50 feet before the draw of the bridge. 
Look to make sure the draw is completely closed 
before crossing. You do not need to stop, but must 
slow down and make sure it's safe, when: 
There is a traffic light showing green. 
The bridge has an attendant or traffic officer who 
controls traffic whenever the bridge opens. 
 
 
4.4 – After-trip Vehicle Inspection 
Inspect your bus at the end of each shift. If you work 
for an interstate carrier, you must complete a written 
inspection report for each bus driven. The report 
must specify each bus and list any defect that would 
affect safety or result in a breakdown. If there are no 
defects, the report should say so. 
 
Riders sometimes damage s afety-related parts 
such as handholds, seats, emergency exits, and 
windows. If you report this damage at the end of a 
shift, mechanics can make repairs before the bus 
goes out again. Mass transit drivers should also 
make sure passenger signaling devices an d brake-
door interlocks work properly. 
 
 
4.5 – Prohibited Practices 
Avoid fueling your bus with riders on board unless 
absolutely necessary. Never refuel in a closed 
building with riders on board. 
 
Don't talk with riders, or engage in any other 
distracting activity, while driving. 
 
Do not tow or push a disabled bus with riders aboard 
the vehicle, unless getting off would be unsafe. Only 
tow or push the bus to the nearest safe spot to 
discharge passengers. Follow your employer's 
guidelines on towing or pushing disabled buses. 
 
 
--- PAGE 77 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely Page 4-4 
Version: July 2017 
4.6 – Use of Brake-door Interlocks 
Urban mass transit coaches may have a brake and 
accelerator interlock system. The interlock applies 
the brakes and holds the throttle in idle position 
when the rear door is open. The interlock releas es 
when you close the rear door. Do not use this safety 
feature in place of the parking brake. 
 
 
Section 4 
Test Your Knowledge 
 
1. Name some things to check in the interior of a 
bus during a Vehicle inspection. 
2. What are some hazardous materials you can 
transport by bus? 
3. What are some hazardous materials you can’t 
transport by bus? 
4. What is a standee line? 
5. Does it matter where you make a disruptive 
passenger get off the bus? 
6. How far from a railroad crossing should you 
stop? 
7. When must you stop before crossing a 
drawbridge? 
8. Describe from memory the “prohibited 
practices” listed in the manual. 
9. The rear door of a transit bus has to be open to 
put on the parking brake. True or False? 
 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read Section 4. 
 
 
 
--- PAGE 78 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
