Section 5 – Air Brakes Page 5-1 
Version: July 2017 
Section 5  
AIR BRAKES 
This Section Covers 
 Air Brake System Parts
 Dual Air Brake Systems
 Inspecting Air Brakes
 Using Air Brakes
This section tells you about air brakes. If you want 
to drive a truck or bus with air brakes, or pull a trailer 
with air brakes, you need to read this section. If you 
want to pull a trailer with air brakes, you also need 
to read Section 6, Combination Vehicles.  
Air brakes use compressed air to make the brakes 
work. Air brakes are a good and safe way of 
stopping large and heavy vehicles, but the brakes 
must be well maintained and used properly. 
Air brakes are really three different braking systems:  
service brake, parking brake, and emergency brake. 
The service brake system applies and releases the 
brakes when you use the brake pedal during 
normal driving. 
The parking brake system applies and releases the 
parking brakes when you use the parking brake 
control. 
The emergency brake system uses parts of the 
service and parking brake systems to stop the 
vehicle in a brake system failure. 
The parts of these systems are discussed in greater 
detail below. 
5.1 – The Parts of an Air Brake System 
There are many parts to an air brake system. You 
should know about the parts discussed here. 
5.1.1 – Air Compressor 
The air compressor pumps air into the air storage 
tanks (reservoirs). The air compressor is connected 
to the engine through gears or a v-belt. The 
compressor may be air cooled or may be cooled by 
the engine cooling system. It may have its own oil 
supply or be lubricated by engine oil. If the 
compressor has its own oil supply, check the oil 
level before driving. 
5.1.2 – Air Compressor Governor 
The governor controls when the air compressor will 
pump air into the air storage tanks. When air tank 
pressure rises to the "cut-out" level (around 125 
pounds per-square-inch or "psi"), the governor 
stops the compressor from pumping air. When the 
tank pressure falls to the "cut-in" pressure (around 
100 psi), the governor allows the compressor to 
start pumping again. 
5.1.3 – Air Storage Tanks 
Air storage tanks are used to hold compressed air. 
The number and size of air tanks varies among 
vehicles. The tanks will hold enough air to allow the 
brakes to be used several times, even if the 
compressor stops working. 
5.1.4 – Air Tank Drains 
Compressed air usually has some water and some 
compressor oil in it, which is bad for the air brake 
system. For example, the water can freeze in cold 
weather and cause brake failure. The water and oil 
tend to collect in the bottom of the air tank. Be sure 
that you drain the air tanks completely. Each air tank 
is equipped with a drain valve in the bottom. There 
are two types: 
Manually operated by turning a quarter turn or by 
pulling a cable. You must drain the tanks yourself 
at the end of each day of driving. See Figure 5.1. 
Automatic--the water and oil are automatically 
expelled. These tanks may be equipped for 
manual draining as well. 
Automatic air tanks are available with electric 
heating devices. These help prevent freezing of the 
automatic drain in cold weather. 
Figure 5.1 

--- PAGE 79 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 5 – Air Brakes Page 5-2 
Version: July 2017 
5.1.5 – Alcohol Evaporator 
Some air brake systems have an alcohol evaporator 
to put alcohol into the air system. This helps to 
reduce the risk of ice in air brake valves and other 
parts during cold weather. Ice inside the system can 
make the brakes stop working. 
 
Check the alcohol container and fill up as 
necessary, every day during cold weather. Daily air 
tank drainage is still needed to get rid of water and 
oil. (Unless the system has automatic drain valves.) 
 
5.1.6 – Safety Valve 
A safety relief valve is installed in the first tank the 
air compressor pumps air to. The safety valve 
protects the tank and the rest of the system from too 
much pressure. The valve is usually set to open at 
150 psi. If the safety valve releases air, something 
is wrong. Have the fault fixed by a mechanic. 
 
5.1.7 – The Brake Pedal 
You put on the brakes by pushing down the brake 
pedal. (It is also called the foot valve or treadle 
valve.) Pushing the pedal down harder applies more 
air pressure. Letting up on the brake pedal reduces 
the air pressure and releases the brakes. Releasing 
the brakes lets some compressed air go out of the 
system, so the air pressure in the tanks is reduced. 
It must be made up by the air compressor. Pressing 
and releasing the pedal unnecessarily can let air out 
faster than the compressor can replace it. If the 
pressure gets too low, the brakes won't work. 
 
5.1.8 – Foundation Brakes 
Foundation brakes are used at each wheel. The 
most common type is the s -cam drum brake. The 
parts of the brake are discussed below. 
 
Brake Drums, Shoes, and Linings. Brake drums 
are located on each end of the vehicle's axles. The 
wheels are bolted to the drums. The braking 
mechanism is inside the drum. To stop, the brake 
shoes and linings are pushed against the inside of  
the drum. This causes friction, which slows the 
vehicle (and creates heat). The heat a drum can 
take without damage depends on how hard and how 
long the brakes are used. Too much heat can make 
the brakes stop working. 
 
S-cam Brakes. When you push the brake pedal, air 
is let into each brake chamber. Air pressure pushes 
the rod out, moving the slack adjuster, thus twisting 
the brake camshaft. This turns the s-cam (so called 
because it is shaped like the letter "S"). The s -cam 
forces the brake shoes away from  one another and 
presses them against the inside of the brake drum. 
When you release the brake pedal, the s -cam 
rotates back and a spring pulls the brake shoes 
away from the drum, letting the wheels roll freely 
again. See Figure 5.2. 
 
 
Figure 5.2 
 
Wedge Brakes. In this type of brake, the brake 
chamber push rod pushes a wedge directly between 
the ends of two brake shoes. This shoves them 
apart and against the inside of the brake drum. 
Wedge brakes may have a single brake chamber, 
or two brake chambers, pus hing wedges in at both 
ends of the brake shoes. Wedge type brakes may 
be self-adjusting or may require manual adjustment. 
 
Disc Brakes. In air -operated disc brakes, air 
pressure acts on a brake chamber and slack 
adjuster, like s -cam brakes. But instead of the s -
cam, a "power screw" is used. The pressure of the 
brake chamber on the slack adjuster turns the 
power screw. The power screw clamps the disc or 
rotor between the brake lining pads of a caliper, 
similar to a large c-clamp. 
 
Wedge brakes and disc brake s are less common 
than s-cam brakes. 
 
5.1.9 – Supply Pressure Gauges 
All vehicles with air brakes have a pressure gauge 
connected to the air tank. If the vehicle has a dual 
air brake system, there will be a gauge for each half 
of the system. (Or a single gauge with two needles.) 
Dual systems will be discussed later. These gauges 
tell you how much pressure is in the air tanks. 
 
5.1.10 – Application Pressure Gauge 
This gauge shows how much air pressure you are 
applying to the brakes. (This gauge is not on all 

--- PAGE 80 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 5 – Air Brakes Page 5-3 
Version: July 2017 
vehicles.) Increasing application pressure to hold 
the same speed means the brakes are fading. You 
should slow down and use a lower gear. The need 
for increased pressure can also be caused by 
brakes out of adjustment, air leaks, or mechanical 
problems. 
5.1.11 – Low Air Pressure Warning 
A low air pressure warning signal is required on 
vehicles with air brakes. A warning signal you can 
see must come on before the air pressure in the 
tanks falls below 55 psi. (Or one half the compressor 
governor cutout pressure on older vehicles.) The 
warning is usually a red light. A buzzer may also 
come on. 
Another type of warning is the "wig wag." This 
device drops a mechanical arm into your view when 
the pressure in the system drops below 55 psi. An 
automatic wig wag will rise out of your view when 
the pressure in the system goes above 55 psi. The 
manual reset type must be placed in the "out of 
view" position manually. It will not stay in place until 
the pressure in the system is above 55 psi. 
On large buses it is common for the low pressure 
warning devices to signal at 80-85 psi. 
5.1.12 – Stop Light Switch 
Drivers behind you must be warned when you put 
your brakes on. The air brake system does this with 
an electric switch that works by air pressure. The 
switch turns on the brake lights when you put on the 
air brakes. 
5.1.13 – Front Brake Limiting Valve 
Some older vehicles (made before 1975) have a 
front brake limiting valve and a control in the cab. 
The control is usually marked "normal" and 
"slippery." When you put the control in the "slippery" 
position, the limiting valve cuts the "normal" air 
pressure to the front brakes by half. Limiting valves 
were used to reduce the chance of the front wheels 
skidding on slippery surfaces. However, they 
actually reduce the stopping power of the vehicle. 
Front wheel braking is good under all conditions. 
Tests have shown front wheel skids from braking 
are not likely even on ice. Make sure the control is 
in the "normal" position to have normal stopping 
power. 
Many vehicles have automatic front wheel limiting 
valves. They reduce the air to the front brakes 
except when the brakes are put on very hard (55 psi 
or more application pressure). These valves cannot 
be controlled by the driver. 
5.1.14 – Spring Brakes 
All trucks, truck tractors, and buses must be 
equipped with emergency brakes and parking 
brakes. They must be held on by mechanical force 
(because air pressure can eventually leak away). 
Spring brakes are usually used to meet these 
needs. When driving, powerful springs are held 
back by air pressure. If the air pressure is removed, 
the springs put on the brakes. A parking brake 
control in the cab allows the driver to let the air out 
of the spring brakes. This lets the springs put the 
brakes on. A leak in the air brake system, which 
causes all the air to be lost, will also cause the 
springs to put on the brakes. 
Tractor and straight truck spring brakes will come 
fully on when air pressure drops to a range of 20 to 
45 psi (typically 20 to 30 psi). Do not wait for the 
brakes to come on automatically. When the low air 
pressure warning light and buzzer first come on, 
bring the vehicle to a safe stop right away, while you 
can still control the brakes. 
The braking power of spring brakes depends on the 
brakes being in adjustment. If the brakes are not 
adjusted properly, neither the regular brakes nor the 
emergency/parking brakes will work right. 
5.1.15 – Parking Brake Controls 
In newer vehicles with air brakes, you put on the 
parking brakes using a diamond-shaped, yellow, 
push-pull control knob. You pull the knob out to put 
the parking brakes (spring brakes) on, and push it 
in to release them. On older vehicles, the parking 
brakes may be controlled by a lever. Use the 
parking brakes whenever you park. 
Caution. Never push the brake pedal down when 
the spring brakes are on. If you do, the brakes could 
be damaged by the combined forces of the springs 
and the air pressure. Many brake systems are 
designed so this will not happen. But not all systems 
are set up that way, and those that are may not 
always work. It is much better to develop the habit 
of not pushing the brake pedal down when the 
spring brakes are on. 
Modulating Control Valves. In some vehicles a 
control handle on the dash board may be used to 
apply the spring brakes gradually. This is called a 
modulating valve. It is spring-loaded so you have a 
feel for the braking action. The more you move the 
control lever, the harder the spring brakes come on. 
They work this way so you can control the spring 
brakes if the service brakes fail. When parking a 
vehicle with a modulating control valve, move the 
--- PAGE 81 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 5 – Air Brakes Page 5-4 
Version: July 2017 
lever as far as it will go and hold it in place with the 
locking device. 
Dual Parking Control Valves. When main air 
pressure is lost, the spring brakes come on. Some 
vehicles, such as buses, have a separate air tank 
which can be used to release the spring brakes. 
This is so you can move the vehicle in an 
emergency. One of the valves is a push-pull type 
and is used to put on the spring brakes for parking. 
The other valve is spring loaded in the "out" position. 
When you push the control in, air from the separate 
air tank releases the spring brakes so you can 
move. When you release the button, the spring 
brakes come on again. There is only enough air in 
the separate tank to do this a few times. Therefore, 
plan carefully when moving. Otherwise, you may be 
stopped in a dangerous location when the separate 
air supply runs out. See Figure 5.3. 
Figure 5.3 
5.1.16 – Antilock Braking Systems (ABS) 
Truck tractors with air brakes built on or after March 
1, 1997, and other air brakes vehicles, (trucks, 
buses, trailers, and converter dollies) built on or 
after March 1, 1998, are required to be equipped 
with antilock brakes. Many commercial vehicles 
built before these dates have been voluntarily 
equipped with ABS. Check the certification label for 
the date of manufacture to determine if your vehicle 
is equipped with ABS. ABS is a computerized 
system that keeps your wheels from locking up 
during hard brake applications. 
Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps to 
tell you if something isn’t working. 
Tractors, trucks, and buses will have yellow ABS 
malfunction lamps on the instrument panel. 
Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on 
the left side, either on the front or rear corner. 
Dollies manufactured on or after March 1, 1998 are 
required to have a lamp on the left side. 
On newer vehicles, the malfunction lamp comes on 
at start-up for a bulb check, and then goes out 
quickly. On older systems, the lamp could stay on 
until you are driving over five mph.  
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes on 
once you are under way, you may have lost ABS 
control at one or more wheels. 
In the case of towed units manufactured before it 
was required by the Department of Transportation, 
it may be difficult to tell if the unit is equipped with 
ABS. Look under the vehicle for the electronic 
control unit (ECU) and wheel speed sensor wires 
coming from the back of the brakes. 
ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does 
not decrease or increase your normal braking 
capability. ABS only activates when wheels are 
about to lock up. 
ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping 
distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle under 
control during hard braking 

--- PAGE 82 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 5 – Air Brakes Page 5-5 
Version: July 2017 
Figure 5.4 
.Subsection 5.1 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. Why must air tanks be drained?
2. What is a supply pressure gauge used for?
3. All vehicles with air brakes must have a low
air pressure warning signal. True or False?
4. What are spring brakes?
5. Front wheel brakes are good under all
conditions. True or False?
6. How do you know if your vehicle is
equipped with antilock brakes?
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsection 5.1. 
5.2 – Dual Air Brake 
Most heavy-duty vehicles use dual air brake 
systems for safety. A dual air brake system has two 
separate air brake systems, which use a single set 
of brake controls. Each system has its own air tanks, 
hoses, lines, etc. One system typically operates the 
regular brakes on the rear axle or axles. The other 
system operates the regular brakes on the front axle 
(and possibly one rear axle). Both systems supply 
air to the trailer (if there is one). The first system is  
called the "primary" system. The other is called the 
"secondary" system. See Figure 5.4. 
Before driving a vehicle with a dual air system, allow 
time for the air compressor to build up a minimum of 
100 psi pressure in both the primary and secondary 
systems. Watch the primary and secondary air 
pressure gauges (or needles, if the system has two 
needles in one gauge). Pay attention to the low air 
pressure warning light and buzzer. The warning 
light and buzzer should shut off when air pressure 
in both systems rises to a value set by the 
manufacturer. This value must be greater than 55 
psi. 
The warning light and buzzer should come on 
before the air pressure drops below 55 psi in either 
system. If this happens while driving, you should 
stop right away and safely park the vehicle. If one 
air system is very low on pressure, either the front 
or the rear brakes will not be operating fully. This 
means it will take you longer to stop. Bring the 
vehicle to a safe stop, and have the air brakes 
system fixed. 

--- PAGE 83 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 5 – Air Brakes Page 5-6 
Version: July 2017 
5.3 – Inspecting Air Brake Systems 
You should use the basic seven-step inspection 
procedure described in Section 2 to inspect your 
vehicle. There are more things to inspect on a 
vehicle with air brakes than one without them. 
These things are discussed below, in the order they 
fit into the seven-step method. 
5.3.1 – During Step 2 Engine Compartment 
Checks 
Check Air Compressor Drive Belt (if compressor is 
belt-driven). If the air compressor is belt-driven, 
check the condition and tightness of the belt. It 
should be in good condition. 
5.3.2 – During Step 5 Walk-around Inspection 
Check Slack Adjusters on S-cam Brakes. Park on 
level ground and chock the wheels to prevent the 
vehicle from moving. Release the parking brakes so 
you can move the slack adjusters. Use gloves and 
pull hard on each slack adjuster that you can reach. 
If a slack adjuster moves more than about one inch 
where the push rod attaches to it, it probably needs 
adjustment. Adjust it or have it adjusted. Vehicles 
with too much brake slack can be very hard to stop. 
Out-of-adjustment brakes are the most common 
problem found in roadside inspections. Be safe. 
Check the slack adjusters.  
All vehicles built since 1994 have automatic slack 
adjustors. Even though automatic slack adjustors 
adjust themselves during full brake applications, 
they must be checked. 
Automatic adjusters should not have to be manually 
adjusted except when performing maintenance on 
the brakes and during installation of the slack 
adjusters.  In a vehicle equipped with automatic 
adjusters, when the pushrod stroke exceeds the 
legal brake adjustment limit, it is an indication that a 
mechanical problem exists in the adjuster itself, a 
problem with the related foundation brake 
components, or that the adjuster was improperly 
installed. 
The manual adjustment of an automatic adjuster to 
bring a brake pushrod stroke within legal limits is 
generally masking a mechanical problem and is not 
fixing it.  Further, routine adjustment of most 
automatic adjusters will likely result in premature 
wear of the adjuster itself.  It is recommended that 
when brakes equipped with automatic adjusters are 
found to be out of adjustment, the driver take the 
vehicle to a repair facility as soon as possible to 
have the problem corrected.   The manual 
adjustment of automatic slack adjusters is 
dangerous because it may give the driver a false 
sense of security regarding the effectiveness of the 
braking system. 
The manual adjustment of an automatic adjuster 
should only be used as a temporary measure to 
correct the adjustment in an emergency situation as 
it is likely the brake will soon be back out of 
adjustment since this procedure usually does not fix 
the underlying adjustment problem.  
 
(Note:  Automatic slack adjusters are made by 
different manufacturers and do not all operate the 
same.  Therefore, the specific manufacturer’s 
Service Manual should be consulted prior to 
troubleshooting a brake adjustment problem.) 
Check Brake Drums (or Discs), Linings, and 
Hoses. Brake drums (or discs) must not have 
cracks longer than one half the width of the friction 
area. Linings (friction material) must not be loose or 
soaked with oil or grease. They must not be 
dangerously thin. Mechanical parts must be in 
place, not broken or missing. Check the air hoses 
connected to the brake chambers to make sure they 
aren't cut or worn due to rubbing. 
5.3.3 – Step 7 Final Air Brake Check 
Do the following checks instead of the hydraulic 
brake check shown in Section 2, Step 7:  Check 
Brake System. 
Check Air Compressor Governor Cut-in and 
Cut-out Pressures.  Pumping by the air 
compressor should start at about 100 psi and stop 
at about 125 psi. (Check manufacturer's 
specifications.)  Run the engine at a fast idle. The 
air governor should cut-out the air compressor at 
about the manufacturer's specified pressure. The air 
pressure shown by your gauge(s) will stop rising. 
With the engine idling, step on and off the brake to 
reduce the air tank pressure. The compressor 
should cut-in at about the manufacturer's specified 
cut-in pressure. The pressure should begin to rise. 
If the air governor does not work as described 
above, it may need to be fixed. A governor that does 
not work properly may not keep enough air pressure 
for safe driving. 
Test Air Leakage Rate. With a fully-charged air 
system (typically 125 psi), turn off the engine, 
release the parking brake (push in); and time the air 
pressure drop.  The loss rate should be less than 
two psi in one minute for single vehicles and less 
than three psi in one minute for combination 
vehicles.   
With the air pressure built up to governor cutoff (120 
– 140 psi), shut off the engine, chock your wheels (if
necessary), release the parking brake (all vehicles), 
--- PAGE 84 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 5 – Air Brakes Page 5-7 
Version: July 2017 
and the tractor protection valve (combination 
vehicle); and fully apply the foot brake.  Hold the foot 
brake for one minute.  Check the air gauge to see if 
the air pressure drops more than three pounds in 
one minute (single vehicle) or four pounds in one 
minute (combination vehicle).  If the air pressure 
falls more than three psi in one minute for single 
vehicles (more than four psi for combination 
vehicles), the air loss rate is too much. Check for air 
leaks and fix before driving the vehicle. Otherwise, 
you could lose your brakes while driving. 
Test Low Pressure Warning Signal. Shut the 
engine off when you have enough air pressure so 
that the low pressure warning signal is not on. Turn 
the electrical power on and step on and off the brake 
pedal to reduce air tank pressure. The low air 
pressure warning signal must come on before the 
pressure drops to less than 55 psi in the air tank (or 
tank with the lowest air pressure, in dual air 
systems). See Figure 5.5. 
If the warning signal doesn't work, you could lose air 
pressure and you would not know it. This could 
cause sudden emergency braking in a single-circuit 
air system. In dual systems the stopping distance 
will be increased. Only limited braking can be done 
before the spring brakes come on. 
Figure 5.5 
Check That Spring Brakes Come On 
Automatically.  Continue to fan off the air pressure 
by stepping on and off the brake pedal to reduce 
tank pressure.  The tractor protection valve and 
parking brake valve should close (pop out) on a 
tractor-trailer combination vehicle and the parking 
brake valve should close (pop out) on other 
combination and single vehicle types when the air 
pressure falls to the manufacturer’s specification 
(20 – 45 psi).  This will cause the spring brakes to 
come on.   
Check Rate of Air Pressure Buildup. When the 
engine is at operating rpms, the pressure should 
build from 85 to 100 psi within 45 seconds in dual 
air systems. (If the vehicle has larger than minimum 
air tanks, the buildup time can be longer and still be 
safe. Check the manufacturer's specifications.) In 
single air systems (pre-1975), typical requirements 
are pressure build-up from 50 to 90 psi within 3 
minutes with the engine at an idle speed of 600-900 
rpms. 
If air pressure does not build up fast enough, your 
pressure may drop too low during driving, requiring 
an emergency stop. Don't drive until you get the 
problem fixed. 
Test Parking Brake. Stop the vehicle, put the 
parking brake on, and gently pull against it in a low 
gear to test that the parking brake will hold. 
Test Service Brakes. Wait for normal air pressure, 
release the parking brake, move the vehicle forward 
slowly (about five mph), and apply the brakes firmly 
using the brake pedal. Note any vehicle "pulling" to 
one side, unusual feel, or delayed stopping action. 
This test may show you problems, which you 
otherwise wouldn't know about until you needed the 
brakes on the road. 
Subsections 5.2 and 5.3 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. What is a dual air brake system?
2. What are the slack adjusters?
3. How can you check slack adjusters?
4. How can you test the low pressure warning
signal?
5. How can you check that the spring brakes come
on automatically?
6. What are the maximum leakage rates?
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 5.2 and 5.3. 
5.4 – Using Air Brakes 
5.4.1 – Normal Stops 
Push the brake pedal down. Control the pressure so 
the vehicle comes to a smooth, safe stop. If you 

--- PAGE 85 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 5 – Air Brakes Page 5-8 
Version: July 2017 
have a manual transmission, don't push the clutch 
in until the engine rpm is down close to idle. When 
stopped, select a starting gear. 
5.4.2 – Braking with Antilock Brakes 
When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a 
vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up. 
When your steering wheels lock up, you lose 
steering control. When your other wheels lock up, 
you may skid, jackknife, or even spin the vehicle. 
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up. The computer 
senses impending lockup, reduces the braking 
pressure to a safe level, and you maintain control. 
You may or may not be able to stop faster with ABS, 
but you should be able to steer around an obstacle 
while braking, and avoid skids caused by over 
braking. 
Having ABS on only the tractor, only the trailer, or 
even on only one axle, still gives you more control 
over the vehicle during braking. Brake normally. 
When only the tractor has ABS, you should be able 
to maintain steering control, and there is less 
chance of jackknifing. But, keep your eye on the 
trailer and let up on the brakes (if you can safely do 
so) if it begins to swing out. 
When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less 
likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control or 
start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if you 
can safely do so) until you gain control. 
When you drive a tractor-trailer combination with 
ABS, you should brake as you always have. In other 
words: 
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely 
and stay in control. 
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you 
have ABS on the tractor, the trailer, or both. 
As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer 
and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to 
stay in control. 
There is only one exception to this procedure, if you 
always drive a straight truck or combination with 
working ABS on all axles, in an emergency stop, you 
can fully apply the brakes. 
Without ABS, you still have normal brake functions. 
Drive and brake as you always have. 
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still have 
regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the system 
serviced soon. 
5.4.3 – Emergency Stops 
If somebody suddenly pulls out in front of you, your 
natural response is to hit the brakes. This is a good 
response if there's enough distance to stop, and you 
use the brakes correctly. 
You should brake in a way that will keep your 
vehicle in a straight line and allow you to turn if it 
becomes necessary. You can use the "controlled 
braking" method or the "stab braking" method. 
Controlled Braking. With this method, you apply 
the brakes as hard as you can without locking the 
wheels. Keep steering wheel movements very small 
while doing this. If you need to make a larger 
steering adjustment or if the wheels lock, release 
the brakes. Re-apply the brakes as soon as you 
can. 
Stab Braking.  Apply your brakes all the way.   
Release brakes when wheels lock up.   As soon as 
the wheels start rolling, apply the brakes fully again. 
(It can take up to one second for the wheels to start 
rolling after you release the brakes. If you re-apply 
the brakes before the wheels start rolling, the 
vehicle won't straighten out.) 
5.4.4 – Stopping Distance 
Stopping distance was described in Section 2 under 
"Speed and Stopping Distance." With air brakes 
there is an added delay - “Brake Lag”.  This is the 
time required for the brakes to work after the brake 
pedal is pushed. With hydraulic brakes (used on 
cars and light/medium trucks), the brakes work 
instantly. However, with air brakes, it takes a little 
time (one half second or more) for the air to flow 
through the lines to the brakes. Thus, the total 
stopping distance for vehicles with air brake 
systems is made up of four different factors. 
Perception Distance + Reaction Distance + Brake 
Lag Distance + Braking Distance = Total Stopping 
Distance. 
The air brake lag distance at 55 mph on dry 
pavement adds about 32 feet. So at 55 mph for an 
average driver under good traction and brake 
conditions, the total stopping distance is over 45 0 
feet. See Figure 5.6. 
--- PAGE 86 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 5 – Air Brakes Page 5-9 
Version: July 2017 
Figure 5.6 
5.4.5 – Brake Fading or Failure 
Brakes are designed so brake shoes or pads rub 
against the brake drum or disks to slow the vehicle. 
Braking creates heat, but brakes are designed to 
take a lot of heat. However, brakes can fade or fail 
from excessive heat caused by using them too 
much and not relying on the engine braking effect. 
Excessive use of the service brakes results in 
overheating and leads to brake fade. Brake fade 
results from excessive heat causing chemical 
changes in the brake lining, which reduce friction, 
and also causing expansion of the brake drums. As 
the overheated drums expand, the brake shoes and 
linings have to move farther to contact the drums, 
and the force of this contact is reduced. Continued 
overuse may increase brake fade until the vehicle 
cannot be slowed down or stopped. 
Brake fade is also affected by adjustment. To safely 
control a vehicle, every brake must do its share of 
the work. Brakes out of adjustment will stop doing 
their share before those that are in adjustment. The 
other brakes can then overheat and fade, and there 
will not be enough braking available to control the 
vehicle(s). Brakes can get out of adjustment quickly, 
especially when they are hot. Therefore, check 
brake adjustment often. 
5.4.6 – Proper Braking Technique 
Remember. The use of brakes on a long and/or 
steep downgrade is only a supplement to the 
braking effect of the engine. Once the vehicle is in 
the proper low gear, the following is the proper 
braking technique: 
Apply the brakes just hard enough to feel a definite 
slowdown. 
When your speed has been reduced to 
approximately five mph below your "safe" speed, 
release the brakes. (This application should last for 
about three seconds.) 
When your speed has increased to your "safe" 
speed, repeat steps 1 and 2. 
For example, if your "safe" speed is 40 mph, you 
would not apply the brakes until your speed reaches 
40 mph. You now apply the brakes hard enough to 
gradually reduce your speed to 35 mph and then 
release the brakes. Repeat this as often as 
necessary until you have reached the end of the 
downgrade. 
5.4.7 – Low Air Pressure 
If the low air pressure warning comes on, stop and 
safely park your vehicle as soon as possible. There 
might be an air leak in the system. Controlled 
braking is possible only while enough air remains in 
the air tanks. The spring brakes will come on when 
the air pressure drops into the range of 20 to 45 psi. 
A heavily loaded vehicle will take a long distance to 
stop because the spring brakes do not work on all 
axles. Lightly loaded vehicles or vehicles on slippery 
roads may skid out of control when the spring 
brakes come on. It is much safer to stop while there 
is enough air in the tanks to use the foot brakes. 
5.4.8 – Parking Brakes 
Any time you park, use the parking brakes, except 
as noted below. Pull the parking brake control knob 
out to apply the parking brakes, push it in to release. 
The control will be a yellow, diamond-shaped knob 
labeled "parking brakes" on newer vehicles. On 
older vehicles, it may be a round blue knob or some 
other shape (including a lever that swings from side 
to side or up and down). 
Don't use the parking brakes if the brakes are very 
hot (from just having come down a steep grade), or 
if the brakes are very wet in freezing temperatures. 
If they are used while they are very hot, they can be 
damaged by the heat. If they are used in freezing 
temperatures when the brakes are very wet, they 
can freeze so the vehicle cannot move. Use wheel 
chocks on a level surface to hold the vehicle. Let hot 
brakes cool before using the parking brakes. If the 
brakes are wet, use the brakes lightly while driving 
in a low gear to heat and dry them. 
If your vehicle does not have automatic air tank 
drains, drain your air tanks at the end of each 
working day to remove moisture and oil. Otherwise, 
the brakes could fail. 

--- PAGE 87 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 5 – Air Brakes Page 5-10 
Version: July 2017 
Never leave your vehicle unattended without 
applying the parking brakes or chocking the 
wheels. Your vehicle might roll away and cause 
injury and damage. 
Subsection 5.4 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. Why should you be in the proper gear before
starting down a hill?
2. What factors can cause brakes to fade or fail?
3. The use of brakes on a long, steep downgrade
is only a supplement to the braking effect of
the engine. True or False?
4. If you are away from your vehicle only a short
time, you do not need to use the parking
brake. True or False?
5. How often should you drain air tanks?
6. How should you brake when you drive a
tractor-trailer combination with ABS?
7. You still have normal brake functions if your
ABS is not working. True or False?
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsection 5.4. 
--- PAGE 88 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
