Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-1 
Version: July 2017 
Section 6  
COMBINATION VEHICLES 
This Section Covers 
 Driving Combinations
 Combination Vehicle Air Brakes
 Antilock Brake Systems
 Coupling and Uncoupling
 Inspecting Combinations
This section provides information needed to pass 
the tests for combination vehicles (tractor-trailer, 
doubles, triples, straight truck with trailer). The 
information is only to give you the minimum 
knowledge needed for driving common combination 
vehicles. You should also study Section 7 if you 
need to pass the test for doubles and triples. 
6.1 – Driving Combination Vehicles 
Safely 
Combination vehicles are usually heavier, longer, 
and require more driving skill than single 
commercial vehicles. This means that drivers of 
combination vehicles need more knowledge and 
skill than drivers of single vehicles. In this section, 
we talk about some important safety factors that 
apply specifically to combination vehicles. 
6.1.1 – Rollover Risks 
More than half of truck driver deaths in crashes are 
the result of truck rollovers. When more cargo is 
piled up in a truck, the "center of gravity" moves 
higher up from the road. The truck becomes easier 
to turn over. Fully loaded rigs are ten times more 
likely to roll over in a crash than empty rigs. 
The following two things will help you prevent 
rollover--keep the cargo as close to the ground as 
possible, and drive slowly around turns. Keeping 
cargo low is even more important in combination 
vehicles than in straight trucks. Also, keep the load 
centered on your rig. If the load is to one side so it 
makes a trailer lean, a rollover is more likely. Make 
sure your cargo is centered and spread out as much 
as possible. (Cargo distribution is covered in 
Section 3 of this manual.) 
Rollovers happen when you turn too fast. Drive 
slowly around corners, on ramps, and off ramps. 
 Avoid quick lane changes, especially when full y 
loaded. 
6.1.2 – Steer Gently 
Trucks with trailers have a dangerous "crack- the-
whip" effect. When you make a quick lane change, 
the crack- the-whip effect can turn the trailer over. 
There are many accidents where only the trailer has 
overturned. 
"Rearward amplification" causes the crack-the-whip 
effect. Figure 6.1 shows eight types of combination 
vehicles and the rearward amplification each has in 
a quick lane change. Rigs with the least crack- the-
whip effect are shown at the top and those with the 
most, at the bottom. Rearward amplification of 2.0 
in the chart means that the rear trailer is twice as 
likely to turn over as the tractor. You can see that 
triples have a rearward amplification of 3.5. This 
means you can roll the last trailer of triples 3.5 times 
as easily as a five-axle tractor. 
Steer gently and smoothly when you are pulling 
trailers. If you make a sudden movement with your 
steering wheel, your trailer could tip over. Follow far 
enough behind other vehicles (at least 1 second for 
each 10 feet of your vehicle length, plus another 
second if going over 40 mph). Look far enough 
down the road to avoid being surprised and having 
to make a sudden lane change. At night, drive 
slowly enough to see obstacles with your headlights 
before it is too late to change lanes or stop gently. 
Slow down to a safe speed before going into a turn. 
6.1.3 – Brake Early 
Control your speed whether fully loaded or empty. 
Large combination vehicles take longer to stop 
when they are empty than when they are fully 
loaded. When lightly loaded, the very stiff 
suspension springs and strong brakes give poor 
traction and make it very easy to lock up the wheels. 
Your trailer can swing out and strike other vehicles. 
Your tractor can jackknife very quickly. You also 
must be very careful about driving "bobtail" tractors 
(tractors without semitrailers). Tests have shown 
that bobtails can be very hard to stop smoothly. It 
takes them longer to stop than a tractor-semitrailer 
loaded to maximum gross weight. 
In any combination rig, allow lots of following 
distance and look far ahead, so you can brake early. 
Don't be caught by surprise and have to make a 
"panic" stop. 
--- PAGE 89 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-2 
Version: July 2017 
Figure 6.1 
6.1.4 – Railroad-highway Crossings 
Railroad-highway crossings can also cause 
problems, particularly when pulling trailers with low 
underneath clearance. 
These trailers can get stuck on raised crossings: 
Low slung units (lowboy, car carrier, moving van, 
possum-belly livestock trailer). 
Single-axle tractor pulling a long trailer with its 
landing gear set to accommodate a tandem-axle 
tractor. 
If for any reason you get stuck on the tracks, get out 
of the vehicle and away from the tracks. Check 
signposts or signal housing at the crossing for 
emergency notification information. Call 911 or 
other emergency number. Give the location of the 
crossing using all identifiable landmarks, especially 
the DOT number, if posted. 
6.1.5 – Prevent Trailer Skids 
When the wheels of a trailer lock up, the trailer will 
tend to swing around. This is more likely to happen 
when the trailer is empty or lightly loaded. This type 
of jackknife is often called a "trailer jackknife." See 
Figure 6.2. 
The procedure for stopping a trailer skid is: 
Recognize the Skid. The earliest and best way to 
recognize that the trailer has started to skid is by 
seeing it in your mirrors. Any time you apply the 
brakes hard, check the mirrors to make sure the 
trailer is staying where it should be. Once the trailer 
swings out of your lane, it's very difficult to prevent 
a jackknife. 
* (From R.D. Ervin, R.L. Nisconger, C.C. MacAdam,
and P.S. Fancher, “Influence of size and weigh t 
variables on the stability and control properties of 
heavy trucks, “University of Michigan Transportation 
Research Institute, 1983). 

--- PAGE 90 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-3 
Version: July 2017 
Figure 6.2 
Stop Using the Brake. Release the brakes to get 
traction back. Do not use the trailer hand brake (if 
you have one) to "straighten out the rig." This is the 
wrong thing to do since the brakes on the trailer 
wheels caused the skid in the first place. Once the 
trailer wheels grip the road again, the trailer will start 
to follow the tractor and straighten out. 
6.1.6 – Turn Wide 
When a vehicle goes around a corner, the rear 
wheels follow a different path than the front wheels. 
This is called off-tracking or "cheating." Figure 6.3 
shows how off-tracking causes the path followed by 
a tractor to be wider than the rig itself. Longer 
vehicles will off-track more. The rear wheels of the 
powered unit (truck or tractor) will off-track some, 
and the rear wheels of the trailer will off-track even 
more. If there is more than one trailer, the rear 
wheels of the last trailer will off-track the most. Steer 
the front end wide enough around a corner so the 
rear end does not run over the curb, pedestrians, 
etc. However, keep the rear of your vehicle close to 
the curb. This will stop other drivers from passing 
you on the right. If you cannot complete your turn 
without entering another traffic lane, turn wide as 
you complete the turn. This is better than swinging 
wide to the left before starting the turn because it 
will keep other drivers from passing you on the right. 
See Figure 6.4. 
Figure 6.3 
Figure 6.4 
6.1.7 – Backing with a Trailer. 
Backing with a Trailer. When backing a car, 
straight truck, or bus, you turn the top of the steering 
wheel in the direction you want to go. When backing 
a trailer, you turn the steering wheel in the opposite 
direction. Once the trailer starts to turn, you must 
turn the wheel the other way to follow the trailer. 
Whenever you back up with a trailer, try to position 
your vehicle so you can back in a straight line. If you 
must back on a curved path, back to the driver's side 
so you can see. See Figure 6.5. 

--- PAGE 91 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-4 
Version: July 2017 
Figure 6.5 
Look at Your Path. Look at your line of travel 
before you begin. Get out and walk around the 
vehicle. Check your clearance to the sides and 
overhead, in and near the path your vehicle. 
Use Mirrors on Both Sides. Check the outside 
mirrors on both sides frequently. Get out of the 
vehicle and re-inspect your path if you are unsure. 
Back Slowly. This will let you make corrections 
before you get too far off course. 
Correct Drift Immediately. As soon as you see the 
trailer getting off the proper path, correct it by turning 
the top of the steering wheel in the direction of the 
drift. 
Pull Forward. When backing a trailer, make pull-
ups to re-position your vehicle as needed.
Subsection 6.1 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. What two things are important to prevent
rollover?
2. When you turn suddenly while pulling
doubles, which trailer is most likely to turn
over?
3. Why should you not use the trailer hand
brake to straighten out a jackknifing trailer?
4. What is off-tracking?
5. When you back a trailer, you should
position your vehicle so you can back in a
curved path to the driver’s side. True or
False?
6. What type of trailers can get stuck on
railroad-highway crossings?
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsection 6.1. 
6.2 – Combination Vehicle Air Brakes 
You should study Section 5: Air Brakes before 
reading this. In combination vehicles the braking 
system has parts to control the trailer brakes, in 
addition to the parts described in Section 5. These 
parts are described below. 
6.2.1 – Trailer Hand Valve 
The trailer hand valve (also called the trolley valve 
or Johnson bar) works the trailer brakes. The trailer 
hand valve should be used only to test the trailer 
brakes. Do not use it in driving because of the 
danger of making the trailer skid. The foot brake 
sends air to all of the brakes on the vehicle 
(including the trailer(s)). There is much less danger 
of causing a skid or jackknife when using just the 
foot brake. 
Never use the hand valve for parking because all 
the air might leak out unlocking the brakes (in 
trailers that don't have spring brakes). Always use 
the parking brakes when parking. If the trailer does 
not have spring brakes, use wheel chocks to keep 
the trailer from moving. 

--- PAGE 92 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-5 
Version: July 2017 
6.2.2 – Tractor Protection Valve 
The tractor protection valve keeps air in the tractor 
or truck brake system should the trailer break away 
or develop a bad leak. The tractor protection valve 
is controlled by the "trailer air supply" control valve 
in the cab. The control valve allows you to open and 
shut the tractor protection valve. The tractor 
protection valve will close automatically if air 
pressure is low (in the range of 20 to 45 psi). When 
the tractor protection valve closes, it stops any air 
from going out of the tractor. It also lets the air out 
of the trailer emergency line. This causes the trailer 
emergency brakes to come on, with possible loss of 
control. (Emergency brakes are covered later.) 
6.2.3 – Trailer Air Supply Control 
The trailer air supply control on newer vehicles is a 
red eight-sided knob, which you use to control the 
tractor protection valve. You push it in to supply the 
trailer with air, and pull it out to shut the air off and 
put on the trailer emergency brakes. The valve will 
pop out (thus closing the tractor protection valve) 
when the air pressure drops into the range of 20 to 
45 psi. Tractor protection valve controls or 
"emergency" valves on older vehicles may not 
operate automatically. There may be a lever rather 
than a knob. The "normal" position is used for 
pulling a trailer. The "emergency" position is used to 
shut the air off and put on the trailer emergency 
brakes. 
6.2.4 – Trailer Air-lines 
Every combination vehicle has two air-lines, the 
service line and the emergency line. They run 
between each vehicle (tractor to trailer, trailer to 
dolly, dolly to second trailer, etc.) 
Service Air-line . The service line (also called the 
control line or signal line) carries air, which is 
controlled by the foot brake or the trailer hand brake. 
Depending on how hard you press the foot brake or 
hand valve, the pressure in the service line will 
similarly change. The service line is connected to 
relay valves. These valves allow the trailer brakes 
to be applied more quickly than would otherwise be 
possible. 
Emergency Air-line. The emergency line (also 
called the supply line) has two purposes. First, it 
supplies air to the trailer air tanks. Second, the 
emergency line controls the emergency brakes on 
combination vehicles. Loss of air pressure in the 
emergency line causes the trailer emergency 
brakes to come on. The pressure loss could be 
caused by a trailer breaking loose, thus tearing 
apart the emergency air hose. Or it could be caused 
by a hose, metal tubing, or other part breaking, 
letting the air out. When the emergency line loses 
pressure, it also causes the tractor protection valve 
to close (the air supply knob will pop out). 
Emergency lines are often coded with the color red 
(red hose, red couplers, or other parts) to keep from 
getting them mixed up with the blue service line. 
6.2.5 – Hose Couplers (Glad Hands) 
Glad hands are coupling devices used to connect 
the service and emergency air-lines from the truck 
or tractor to the trailer. The couplers have a rubber 
seal, which prevents air from escaping. Clean the 
couplers and rubber seals before a connection is 
made. When connecting the glad hands, press the 
two seals together with the couplers at a 90 degree 
angle to each other. A turn of the glad hand attached 
to the hose will join and lock the couplers. 
When coupling, make sure to couple the proper glad 
hands together. To help avoid mistakes, colors are 
sometimes used. Blue is used for the service lines 
and red for the emergency (supply) lines. 
Sometimes, metal tags are attached to the lines with 
the words "service" and "emergency" stamped on 
them. See Figure 6.6 
Figure 6.6 

--- PAGE 93 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-6 
Version: July 2017 
If you do cross the air -lines, supply air will be sent 
to the service li ne instead of going to charge the 
trailer air tanks. Air will not be available to release 
the trailer spring brakes (parking brakes). If the 
spring brakes don't release when you push the 
trailer air supply control, check the air-line 
connections. 
 
Older trailers do not have spring brakes. If the air 
supply in the trailer air tank has leaked away there 
will be no emergency brakes, and the trailer wheels 
will turn freely. If you crossed the air-lines, you could 
drive away but you wouldn't have trailer brakes. This 
would be very dangerous. Always test the trailer 
brakes before driving with the hand valve or by 
pulling the air supply (tractor protection valve) 
control. Pull gently against them in a low gear to 
make sure the brakes work. 
 
Some vehicles have "dead end" or dummy couplers 
to which the hoses may be attached when they are 
not in use. This will prevent water and dirt from 
getting into the coupler and the air-lines. Use the 
dummy couplers when the air-lines are not 
connected to a trailer. If there are no  dummy 
couplers, the glad hands can sometimes be locked 
together (depending on the couplings). It is very 
important to keep the air supply clean. 
 
6.2.6 – Trailer Air Tanks 
 
Each trailer and converter dolly has one or more air 
tanks. They are filled by the emergency (supply) line 
from the tractor. They provide the air pressure used 
to operate trailer brakes. Air pressure is sent from 
the air tanks to the brakes by relay valves.  
 
The pressure in the service line tells how much 
pressure the relay valves shou ld send to the trailer 
brakes. The pressure in the service line is controlled 
by the brake pedal (and the trailer hand brake). 
 
It is important that you don't let water and oil build 
up in the air tanks. If you do, the brakes may not 
work correctly. Each tank has a drain valve on it and 
you should drain each tank every day. If your tanks 
have automatic drains, they will keep most moisture 
out. But you should still open the drains to make 
sure. 
 
6.2.7 – Shut-off Valves 
 
Shut-off valves (also called cut-out cocks) are used 
in the service and supply air-lines at the back of 
trailers used to tow other trailers. These valves 
permit closing the air-lines off when another trailer 
is not being towed. You must check that all shut -off 
valves are in the open position e xcept the ones at 
the back of the last trailer, which must be closed. 
 
6.2.8 – Trailer Service, Parking and Emergency 
Brakes 
 
Newer trailers have spring brakes just like trucks 
and truck tractors. However, converter dollies and 
trailers built before 1975 are not required to have 
spring brakes. Those that do not have spring brakes 
have emergency brakes, which work from the air 
stored in the trailer air tank. The emergency brakes 
come on whenever air pressure in the emergency 
line is lost. These trailers hav e no parking brake. 
The emergency brakes come on whenever the air 
supply knob is pulled out or the trailer is 
disconnected. A major leak in the emergency line 
will cause the tractor protection valve to close and 
the trailer emergency brakes to come on. But  the 
brakes will hold only as long as there is air pressure 
in the trailer air tank. Eventually, the air will leak 
away and then there will be no brakes. Therefore, it 
is very important for safety that you use wheel 
chocks when you park trailers without sp ring 
brakes.  
 
You may not notice a major leak in the service line 
until you try to put the brakes on. Then, the air loss 
from the leak will lower the air tank pressure quickly. 
If it goes low enough, the trailer emergency brakes 
will come on. 
 
 
Subsection 6.2 
Test Your Knowledge 
 
1. Why should you not use the trailer hand 
valve while driving? 
2. Describe what the trailer air supply control 
does. 
3. Describe what the service line is for. 
4. What is the emergency air-line for? 
5. Why should you use chocks when parking 
a trailer without spring brakes? 
6. Where are shut-off valves? 
 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsection 6.2. 
 
 
--- PAGE 94 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-7 
Version: July 2017 
6.3 – Antilock Brake Systems 
6.3.1 – Trailers Required to Have ABS 
All trailers and converter dollies built on or after 
March 1, 1998, are required to have ABS. However, 
many trailers and converter dollies built before this 
date have been voluntarily equipped with ABS. 
Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on 
the left side, either on the front or rear corner. See 
Figure 6.7. Dollies manufactured on or after March 
1, 1998, are required to have a lamp on the left side. 
In the case of vehicles manufactured before the 
required date, it may be difficult to tell if the unit is 
equipped with ABS. Look under the vehicle for the 
ECU and wheel speed sensor wires coming from 
the back of the brakes. 
Figure 6.7 
6.3.2 – Braking with ABS 
ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does 
not decrease or increase your normal braking 
capability. ABS only activates when wheels are 
about to lock up. 
ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping 
distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle under 
control during hard braking. 
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up. The computer 
senses impending lockup, reduces the braking 
pressure to a safe level, and you maintain control. 
Having ABS on only the trailer, or even on only one 
axle, still gives you more control over the vehicle 
during braking. 
When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less 
likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control or 
start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if you 
can safely do so) until you gain control. 
When you drive a tractor-trailer combination with 
ABS, you should brake as you always have. In other 
words: 
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely 
and stay in control. 
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you 
have ABS on the tractor, the trailer, or both. 
As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer 
and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to 
stay in control. 
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still have 
regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the system 
serviced soon. 
ABS won’t allow you to drive faster, follow more 
closely, or drive less carefully. 
6.4 – Coupling and Uncoupling 
Knowing how to couple and uncouple correctly is 
basic to safe operation of combination vehicles. 
Wrong coupling and uncoupling can be very 
dangerous. General coupling and uncoupling steps 
are listed below. There are differences between 
different rigs, so learn the details of coupling and 
uncoupling the truck(s) you will operate. 
6.4.1 – Coupling Tractor-Semitrailers 
Step 1. Inspect Fifth Wheel 
Check for damaged/missing parts. 
Check to see that mounting to tractor is secure, no 
cracks in frame, etc. 
Be sure that the fifth wheel plate is greased as 
required. Failure to keep the fifth wheel plate 
lubricated could cause steering problems because 
of friction between the tractor and trailer. 
Check if fifth wheel is in proper position for 
coupling: 
Wheel tilted down toward rear of tractor. 

--- PAGE 95 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-8 
Version: July 2017 
Jaws open. 
Safety unlocking handle in the automatic lock 
position. 
If you have a sliding fifth wheel, make sure it is 
locked. 
Make sure the trailer kingpin is not bent or broken. 
Step 2. Inspect Area and Chock Wheels 
Make sure area around the vehicle is clear. 
Be sure trailer wheels are chocked or spring 
brakes are on. 
Check that cargo (if any) is secured against 
movement due to tractor being coupled to the 
trailer. 
Step 3. Position Tractor 
Put the tractor directly in front of the trailer. (Never 
back under the trailer at an angle because you 
might push the trailer sideways and break the 
landing gear.) 
Check position, using outside mirrors, by looking 
down both sides of the trailer. 
Step 4. Back Slowly 
Back until fifth wheel just touches the trailer. 
Don't hit the trailer. 
Step 5. Secure Tractor 
Put on the parking brake. 
Put transmission in neutral. 
Step 6. Check Trailer Height 
The trailer should be low enough that it is raised 
slightly by the tractor when the tractor is backed 
under it. Raise or lower the trailer as needed. (If 
the trailer is too low, the tractor may strike and 
damage the trailer nose; if the trailer is too high, it 
may not couple correctly.) 
Check that the kingpin and fifth wheel are aligned. 
Step 7. Connect Air-lines to Trailer 
Check glad hand seals and connect tractor 
emergency air-line to trailer emergency glad hand. 
Check glad hand seals and connect tractor service 
air-line to trailer service glad hand. 
Make sure air-lines are safely supported where 
they won't be crushed or caught while tractor is 
backing under the trailer. 
Step 8. Supply Air to Trailer 
From cab, push in "air supply" knob or move 
tractor protection valve control from the 
"emergency" to the "normal" position to supply air 
to the trailer brake system. 
Wait until the air pressure is normal. 
Check brake system for crossed air-lines. 
Shut engine off so you can hear the brakes. 
Apply and release trailer brakes and listen for sound 
of trailer brakes being applied and released. You 
should hear the brakes move when applied and air 
escape when the brakes are released. 
Check air brake system pressure gauge for signs of 
major air loss. 
When you are sure trailer brakes are working, start 
engine. 
Make sure air pressure is up to normal. 
Step 9. Lock Trailer Brakes 
Pull out the "air supply" knob or move the tractor 
protection valve control from "normal" to 
"emergency." 
Step 10. Back Under Trailer 
Use lowest reverse gear. 
Back tractor slowly under trailer to avoid hitting the 
kingpin too hard. 
Stop when the kingpin is locked into the fifth wheel. 
Step 11. Check Connection for Security 
Raise trailer landing gear slightly off ground. 
Pull tractor gently forward while the trailer brakes 
are still locked to check that the trailer is locked 
onto the tractor. 
Step 12. Secure Vehicle 
Put transmission in neutral. 
Put parking brakes on. 
Shut off engine and take key with you so someone 
else won't move truck while you are under it. 
Step 13. Inspect Coupling 
Use a flashlight, if necessary. 
Make sure there is no space between upper and 
lower fifth wheel. If there is space, something is 
wrong (kingpin may be on top of the closed fifth 
wheel jaws, and trailer would come loose very 
easily). 
--- PAGE 96 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-9 
Version: July 2017 
Go under trailer and look into the back of the fifth 
wheel. Make sure the fifth wheel jaws have closed 
around the shank of the kingpin. 
Check that the locking lever is in the "lock" 
position. 
Check that the safety latch is in position over 
locking lever. (On some fifth wheels the catch must 
be put in place by hand.) 
If the coupling isn't right, don't drive the coupled 
unit; get it fixed. 
Step 14. Connect the Electrical Cord and Check 
Air-lines 
Plug the electrical cord into the trailer and fasten 
the safety catch. 
Check both air-lines and electrical line for signs of 
damage. 
Make sure air and electrical lines will not hit any 
moving parts of vehicle. 
Step 15. Raise Front Trailer Supports (Landing 
Gear) 
Use low gear range (if so equipped) to begin 
raising the landing gear. Once free of weight, 
switch to the high gear range. 
Raise the landing gear all the way up. (Never drive 
with landing gear only part way up as it may catch 
on railroad tracks or other things.) 
After raising landing gear, secure the crank handle 
safely. 
When full weight of trailer is resting on tractor: 
Check for enough clearance between rear of tractor 
frame and landing gear. (When tractor turns 
sharply, it must not hit landing gear.) 
Check that there is enough clearance between the 
top of the tractor tires and the nose of the trailer. 
Step 16. Remove Trailer Wheel Chocks 
Remove and store wheel chocks in a safe place. 
6.4.2 – Uncoupling Tractor-Semitrailers 
The following steps will help you to uncouple safely. 
Step 1. Position Rig 
Make sure surface of parking area can support 
weight of trailer. 
Have tractor lined up with the trailer. (Pulling out at 
an angle can damage landing gear.) 
Step 2. Ease Pressure on Locking Jaws 
Shut off trailer air supply to lock trailer brakes. 
Ease pressure on fifth wheel locking jaws by 
backing up gently. (This will help you release the 
fifth wheel locking lever.) 
Put parking brakes on while tractor is pushing 
against the kingpin. (This will hold rig with pressure 
off the locking jaws.) 
Step 3. Chock Trailer Wheels 
Chock the trailer wheels if the trailer doesn't have 
spring brakes or if you're not sure. (The air could 
leak out of the trailer air tank, releasing its 
emergency brakes. Without chocks, the trailer could 
move.) 
Step 4. Lower the Landing Gear 
If trailer is empty, lower the landing gear until it 
makes firm contact with the ground. 
If trailer is loaded, after the landing gear makes firm 
contact with the ground, turn crank in low gear a few 
extra turns. This will lift some weight off the tractor. 
(Do not lift trailer off the fifth wheel.) This will: 
Make it easier to unlatch fifth wheel. 
Make it easier to couple next time. 
Step 5. Disconnect Air-lines and Electrical Cable 
Disconnect air-lines from trailer. Connect air-line 
glad hands to dummy couplers at back of cab or 
couple them together. 
Hang electrical cable with plug down to prevent 
moisture from entering it. 
Make sure lines are supported so they won't be 
damaged while driving the tractor. 
Step 6. Unlock Fifth Wheel 
Raise the release handle lock. 
Pull the release handle to "open" position. 
Keep legs and feet clear of the rear tractor wheels 
to avoid serious injury in case the vehicle moves. 
Step 7. Pull Tractor Partially Clear of Trailer 
Pull tractor forward until fifth wheel comes out from 
under the trailer. 
Stop with tractor frame under trailer (prevents trailer 
from falling to ground if landing gear should collapse 
or sink). 
--- PAGE 97 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-10 
Version: July 2017 
Step 8. Secure Tractor 
Apply parking brake. 
Place transmission in neutral. 
Step 9. Inspect Trailer Supports 
Make sure ground is supporting trailer. 
Make sure landing gear is not damaged. 
Step 10. Pull Tractor Clear of Trailer 
Release parking brakes. 
Check the area and drive tractor forward until it 
clears.  
Subsections 6.3 and 6.4 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. What might happen if the trailer is too high when
you try to couple?
2. After coupling, how much space should be
between the upper and lower fifth wheel?
3. You should look into the back of the fifth wheel
to see if it is locked onto the kingpin. True or
False?
4. To drive you need to raise the landing gear only
until it just lifts off the pavement. True or False?
5. How do you know if your trailer is equipped with
antilock brakes?
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 6.3 and 6.4. 
6.4.3 - Coupling a  Pintle Hook 
Step 1. Inspect Pintle Hook 
Before operating, check for worn, damaged, or 
missing parts, and make sure mount is secure. If 
the pintle hook is not secured to the mounting 
surface, the pintle hook could separate from the 
vehicle which, if not avoided, could result in death 
or serious injury. 
Step 2. Unlock Lock Pin and Open Latch 
Unlock and remove the tethered lock pin, if 
applicable (Figure 16). 
Lift the lock handle away from the vehicle until the 
lock clears the lock seat on the hook body.  
Open the latch by rotating the latch assembly up 
toward the vehicle until the latch is in its most 
upright position, then release the lock handle. 
(Figure 17 and 18) 
.
Step 3. Lower Drawbar into Place 
Position the drawbar eye over the horn of the pintle 
hook and lower it into place. 
Step 4. Lock Pintle Hook 
Push the latch closed. When correctly locked, the 
lock handle will rotate and move up until it is flush 
with the top of the latch (Figure 19). 

--- PAGE 98 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-11 
Version: July 2017 
Insert the tethered lock pin through the latch and 
lock holes, and close the tethered wire lock pin, if 
applicable (Figure 16). 
Failure to correctly lock the latch can result in 
separation of the trailer and vehicle which, if not 
avoided, could result in death or serious injury. 
6.4.4 - Uncoupling a Pintle Hook 
Step 1. Park on Level Surface 
Park the trailer on a firm level surface and block 
trailer tires. 
Step 2. Disconnect Electrical Connector, 
Breakaway Brake Switch and Safety Chains
Disconnect electrical connector. 
Disconnect breakaway brake switch lanyard. 
Disconnect safety chains from tow vehicle. 
Step 3. Unlock the Coupler
Unlock the coupler and open it. 
Step 4. Check Ground Surface for Correct 
Support 
Before extending jack, make certain the ground 
surface below the jack pad will support the tongue 
load. 
Step 5. Rotate Jack Handle
Rotate jack handle to extend the jack and transfer 
the weight of the trailer tongue to the jack. 
Step 6. Raise Trailer Coupler
Raise the trailer coupler above the tow vehicle 
hitch. 
Step 7. Drive Forward
Drive tow vehicle forward. 
6.4.5 - Coupling a Drawbar 
Step 1. Remove Safety Lock screw and Rotate 
Safety Cover Bar 
Remove safety lock screw (2), recover and keep 
the relative self-locking nut (12) aside then also 
loosen safety lock screw (2a) and turn out the 
adjustment screw (3) by at least five turns. 
Rotate the safety cover bar (4) outwards so that it 
is completely open. 
Step 2. Reverse Truck  
Reverse truck very slowly until the ball cup 
drawbar eye (6) is in position exactly above the 
drawbar coupling ball (5). 
Step 3. Lower the Drawbeam 
Lower the drawbeam until the ball cup drawbar eye 
(6) lies completely covering the drawbar coupling 
ball (5). 
Step 4. Rotate the Safety Cover Bar 
Rotate the safety cover bar back inwards (4) and fit 
in safety lock screw (2) together with its self-
locking nut. 
Tighten in both the lock screws (2, 2a) together 
with their relative self-locking nuts (12, 12a) at a 
350 to 400 Nm torque wrench setting. 
Step 5. Adjust the Adjustment Screw 
Adjust the adjustment screw (3) until a 0.3 - 0.5 
mm vertical clearance between the guard disk (13) 
and the ball cup (6) is reached. Lock setting with 
counter nut (11). 

--- PAGE 99 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-12 
Version: July 2017 
In the event that the safety cover bar (4) will not 
perfectly lodge into its seating appropriately, travel 
is strictly forbidden.  
Step 6. Protect Coupling Ball and Anchor Edge 
onto Ball 
Protect the part that is still visible of the coupling 
ball (5) with the rubber dust proof bellows 
protection cover (7). Accurately anchor the edge 
directly onto the ball itself. 
Step 7. Lubricate the Drawbar Eye 
Lubricate the inside of the drawbar eye ball cup (6) 
directly through the grease nipple (18). 
6.4.6 - Uncoupling a Drawbar 
Step 1. Turn Trailer Brake On
 Make sure that the trailer brake is 
on. 
Step 2. Remove Cover and Loosen Screws
Remove the rubber dust proof bellows protection 
cover (7). 
Loosen the adjustment screw (3) and the counter 
nut (11). 
Loosen safety lock screw (2a) and remove safety 
lock screw (2) together with its self-locking nut 
(12). 
Step 3. Rotate Safety Cover Bar and Lift Trailer 
Drawbeam 
Rotate the safety cover bar (4) outwards so that it 
is completely open. 
Lift the trailer drawbeam until the drawbar coupling 
ball (5) is fully visible, then travel forward with the 
trailer very slowly. 
Rotate the safety cover bar inwards (4) until it 
lodges back in its housing. 
Step 4. Lock Safety Screw and Tighten Self-
Locking Nut 
Fit in safety lock screw (2) and tighten in self-
locking nut (12). 
6.4.7 - Coupling a Gooseneck Hitch 
If you are hooking up a Gooseneck or a fifth wheel 
hitch, the procedure is a little different from a 
receiver and ball, but it is not more difficult.  
Step 1. Open the Latch and Lubricate the 
Gooseneck Ball 
Open the clamp latch on the Gooseneck coupler. 
Make sure that the Gooseneck ball is properly 
lubricated.  
Step 2. Position Coupler and Latch the Clamp 
Position the trailer's coupler directly over the ball 
and lower the Gooseneck trailer into position and 
latch the clamp.  
Step 3. Attach Safety Chains 
Attach your safety chains. Remember that all 
trailers are required by law to have safety chains. 
Step 4. Connect Trailer Light Wiring  
Connect your trailer light wiring to your vehicle's 
connector. 
Check all of your lights, including your brake lights. 
Step 5. Lower and Stow the Trailer Jacks 
Completely lower and stow the trailer jacks, 
allowing the weight to settle onto the tow vehicle. 
6.4.8 Uncoupling a Gooseneck Hitch 
Step 1. Remove Safety Pin and Clip
Simply remove safety pin and clip.  
Step 2. Rotate Handle and Raise Trailer Off Ball 
Rotate handle to this position (Fig. B) and raise 
trailer off ball. Coupler will return to load position 
automatically.  
Step 3. Install Safety Pin and Clip
Install safety pin and clip. (Fig. B) 

--- PAGE 100 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-13 
Version: July 2017 
6.5 – Inspecting a Combination Vehicle 
Use the seven-step inspection procedure described 
in Section 2 to inspect your combination vehicle. 
There are more things to inspect on a combination 
vehicle than on a single vehicle. (For example, tires, 
wheels, lights, reflectors, etc.) However, there are 
also some new things to check. These are 
discussed below. 
6.5.1 – Additional Things to Check during a 
Walk-around Inspection 
Do these checks in addition to those already listed 
in Section 2. 
Coupling System Areas 
Check fifth wheel (lower). 
Securely mounted to frame. 
No missing or damaged parts. 
Enough grease. 
No visible space between upper and lower fifth  
wheel. 
Locking jaws around the shank, not the head of 
kingpin. See Figure 6.8. 
Release arm properly seated and safety 
latch/lock engaged. 
Figure 6.8 
Check fifth wheel (upper). 
Glide plate securely mounted to trailer frame. 
Kingpin not damaged. 
Air and electric lines to trailer. 
Electrical cord firmly plugged in and secured. 
Air-lines properly connected to glad hands, no air 
leaks, properly secured with enough slack for turns. 
All lines free from damage. 
Sliding fifth wheel. 
Slide not damaged or parts missing. 
Properly greased. 
All locking pins present and locked in place. 
If air powered--no air leaks. 
Check that fifth wheel is not so far forward that 
tractor frame will hit landing gear, or the cab hit the 
trailer, during turns. 
Landing Gear 
Fully raised, no missing parts, not bent or 
otherwise damaged. 
Crank handle in place and secured. 
If power operated, no air or hydraulic leaks. 

--- PAGE 101 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles Page 6-14 
Version: July 2017 
6.5.2 – Combination Vehicle Brake Check 
Do these checks in addition to Section 5.3: 
Inspecting Air Brake Systems. 
The following section explains how to check air 
brakes on combination vehicles. Check the brakes 
on a double or triple trailer as you would any 
combination vehicle. 
Check That Air Flows to All Trailers.  Use the 
tractor parking brake and/or chock the wheels to 
hold the vehicle. Wait for air pressure to reach 
normal, then push in the red "trailer air supply" knob. 
This will supply air to the emergency (supply) lines. 
Use the trailer handbrake to provide air to the 
service line. Go to the rear of the rig. Open the 
emergency line shut-off valve at the rear of the last 
trailer. You should hear air escaping, showing the 
entire system is charged. Close the emergency line 
valve. Open the service line valve to check that 
service pressure goes through all the trailers (this 
test assumes that the trailer handbrake or the 
service brake pedal is on), and then close the valve. 
If you do NOT hear air escaping from both lines, 
check that the shut-off valves on the trailer(s) and 
dolly(ies) are in the OPEN position. You MUST have 
air all the way to the back for all the brakes to work. 
Test Tractor Protection Valve. Charge the trailer 
Air-brake system. (That is, build up normal air-
pressure and push the "air supply" knob in.) Shut 
the engine off. Step on and off the brake pedal 
several times to reduce the air pressure in the tanks. 
The trailer air supply control (also called the tractor 
protection valve control) should pop out (or go from 
"normal" to "emergency" position) when the air 
pressure falls into the pressure range specified by 
the manufacturer. (Usually within the range of 20 to 
45 psi.) 
If the tractor protection valve doesn't work right, an 
air hose or trailer brake leak could drain all the air 
from the tractor. This would cause the emergency 
brakes to come on, with possible loss of control. 
Test Trailer Emergency Brakes. Charge the trailer 
air brake system and check that the trailer rolls 
freely. Then stop and pull out the trailer air supply 
control (also called tractor protection valve control 
or trailer emergency valve), or place it in the 
"emergency" position. Pull gently on the trailer with 
the tractor to check that the trailer emergency 
brakes are on. 
Test Trailer Service Brakes. Check for normal air 
pressure, release the parking brakes, move the 
vehicle forward slowly, and apply trailer brakes with 
the hand control (trolley valve), if so equipped. You 
should feel the brakes come on. This tells you the 
trailer brakes are connected and working. (The 
trailer brakes should be tested with the hand valve 
but controlled in normal operation with the foot 
pedal, which applies air to the service brakes at all 
wheels.) 
Subsection 6.5 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. Which shut-off valves should be open and
which closed?
2. How can you test that air flows to all trailers?
3. How can you test the tractor protection valve?
4. How can you test the trailer emergency brakes?
5. How can you test the trailer service brakes?
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer all of them, re-read subsection 6.5. 

--- PAGE 102 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
