Section 7 - Doubles and Triples Page 7-1 
Version: July 2017 
Section 7  
DOUBLES AND TRIPLES 
This Section Covers 
 Pulling Double/Triple Trailers
 Coupling and Uncoupling
 Inspecting Doubles and Triples
 Checking Air Brakes
This section has information you need to pass the 
CDL knowledge test for driving safely with double 
and triple trailers. It tells about how important it is to 
be very careful when driving with more than one 
trailer, how to couple and uncouple correctly, and 
about inspecting doubles and triples carefully. (You 
should also study Sections 2, 5, and 6.) 
7.1 – Pulling Double/Triple Trailers 
Take special care when pulling two and three 
trailers. There are more things that can go wrong, 
and doubles/triples are less stable than other 
commercial vehicles. Some areas of concern are 
discussed below. 
7.1.1 – Prevent Trailer from Rolling Over 
To prevent trailers from rolling over, you must steer 
gently and go slowly around corners, on ramps, off 
ramps, and curves. A safe speed on a curve for a 
straight truck or a single trailer combination vehicle 
may be too fast for a set of doubles or triples. 
7.1.2 – Beware of the Crack-the-whip Effect 
Doubles and triples are more likely to turn over than 
other combination vehicles because of the "crack-
the-whip" effect. You must steer gently when pulling 
trailers. The last trailer in a combination is most 
likely to turn over. If you don't understand the crack-
the-whip effect, study subsection 6.1.2 of this 
manual. 
7.1.3 – Inspect Completely 
There are more critical parts to check when you 
have two or three trailers. Check them all. Follow 
the procedures described later in this section. 
7.1.4 – Look Far Ahead 
Doubles and triples must be driven very smoothly to 
avoid rollover or jackknife. Therefore, look far ahead 
so you can slow down or change lanes gradually 
when necessary. 
7.1.5 – Manage Space 
Doubles and triples take up more space than other 
commercial vehicles. They are not only longer, but 
also need more space because they can't be turned 
or stopped suddenly. Allow more following distance. 
Make sure you have large enough gaps before 
entering or crossing traffic. Be certain you are clear 
at the sides before changing lanes. 
7.1.6 – Adverse Conditions 
Be more careful in adverse conditions. In bad 
weather, slippery conditions, and mountain driving, 
you must be especially careful if you drive double 
and triple bottoms. You will have greater length and 
more dead axles to pull with your drive axles than 
other drivers. There is more chance for skids and 
loss of traction. 
7.1.7 – Parking the Vehicle 
Make sure you do not get in a spot you cannot pull 
straight through. You need to be aware of how 
parking lots are arranged in order to avoid a long 
and difficult escape. 
7.1.8 – Antilock Braking Systems on Converter 
Dollies 
Converter dollies built on or after March 1, 1998, are 
required to have antilock brakes. These dollies will 
have a yellow lamp on the left side of the dolly. 
7.2 – Coupling and Uncoupling 
Knowing how to couple and uncouple correctly is 
basic to safe operation of doubles and triples. 
Wrong coupling and uncoupling can be very 
dangerous. Coupling and uncoupling steps for 
doubles and triples are listed below. 
7.2.1 – Coupling Twin Trailers 
Secure Second (Rear) Trailer 
If the second trailer doesn't have spring brakes, 
drive the tractor close to the trailer, connect the 
emergency line, charge the trailer air tank, and 
disconnect the emergency line. This will set the 
trailer emergency brakes (if the slack adjusters are 
correctly adjusted). Chock the wheels if you have 
any doubt about the brakes. 
For the safest handling on the road, the more 
heavily loaded semitrailer should be in first position 
behind the tractor. The lighter trailer should be in the 
rear. 
--- PAGE 103 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 7 - Doubles and Triples Page 7-2 
Version: July 2017 
A converter gear on a dolly is a coupling device of 
one or two axles and a fifth wheel by which a 
semitrailer can be coupled to the rear of a tractor-
trailer combination forming a double bottom rig. See 
Figure 7.1. 
Figure 7.1 
Position Converter Dolly in Front of Second 
(Rear) Trailer 
Release dolly brakes by opening the air tank 
petcock. (Or, if the dolly has spring brakes, use the 
dolly parking brake control.) 
If the distance is not too great, wheel the dolly into 
position by hand so it is in line with the kingpin. 
Or, use the tractor and first semitrailer to pick up the 
converter dolly: 
Position combination as close as possible to 
converter dolly. 
Move dolly to rear of first semitrailer and couple it 
to the trailer. 
Lock pintle hook. 
Secure dolly support in raised position. 
Pull dolly into position as close as possible to nose 
of the second semitrailer. 
Lower dolly support. 
Unhook dolly from first trailer. 
Wheel dolly into position in front of second trailer in 
line with the kingpin. 
Connect Converter Dolly to Front Trailer 
Back first semitrailer into position in front of dolly 
tongue. 
Hook dolly to front trailer. 
Lock pintle hook. 
Secure converter gear support in raised position. 
Connect Converter Dolly to Rear Trailer 
Make sure trailer brakes are locked and/or wheels 
chocked. 
Make sure trailer height is correct. (It must be 
slightly lower than the center of the fifth wheel, so 
trailer is raised slightly when dolly is pushed 
under.) 
Back converter dolly under rear trailer. 
Raise landing gear slightly off ground to prevent 
damage if trailer moves. 
Test coupling by pulling against pin of the second 
semitrailer. 
Make visual check of coupling. (No space between 
upper and lower fifth wheel. Locking jaws closed 
on kingpin.) 
Connect safety chains, air hoses, and light cords. 
Close converter dolly air tank petcock and shut-off 
valves at rear of second trailer (service and 
emergency shut-offs). 
Open shut-off valves at rear of first trailer (and on 
dolly if so equipped). 
Raise landing gear completely. 
Charge trailer brakes (push "air supply" knob in), 
and check for air at rear of second trailer by 
opening the emergency line shut-off. If air pressure 
isn't there, something is wrong and the brakes 
won't work. 
7.2.2 – Uncoupling Twin Trailers 
Uncouple Rear Trailer 
Park rig in a straight line on firm level ground. 
Apply parking brakes so rig won't move. 
Chock wheels of second trailer if it doesn't have 
spring brakes. 
Lower landing gear of second semitrailer enough 
to remove some weight from dolly. 
Close air shut-offs at rear of first semitrailer (and 
on dolly if so equipped). 
Disconnect all dolly air and electric lines and 
secure them. 
Release dolly brakes. 
Release converter dolly fifth wheel latch. 
Slowly pull tractor, first semitrailer, and dolly 
forward to pull dolly out from under rear semitrailer. 

--- PAGE 104 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 7 - Doubles and Triples Page 7-3 
Version: July 2017 
Uncouple Converter Dolly 
Lower dolly landing gear. 
Disconnect safety chains. 
Apply converter gear spring brakes or chock 
wheels. 
Release pintle hook on first semi-trailer. 
Slowly pull clear of dolly. 
 
Never unlock the pintle hook with the dolly still under 
the rear trailer. The dolly tow bar may fly up, 
possibly causing injury, and making it very difficult  
to re-couple. 
 
7.2.3 – Coupling and Uncoupling Triple Trailers 
 
Couple Tractor/First Semitrailer to 
Second/Third Trailers 
Couple tractor to first trailer. Use the method 
already described for coupling tractor-semitrailers. 
Move converter dolly into position and couple first 
trailer to second trailer using the method for 
coupling doubles. Triples rig is now complete. 
 
Uncouple Triple-trailer Rig 
Uncouple third trailer by pulling the dolly out, then 
unhitching the dolly using the method for 
uncoupling doubles. 
Uncouple remainder of rig as you would any 
double-bottom rig using the method already 
described. 
 
7.2.4 – Coupling and Uncoupling Other 
Combinations 
 
The methods described so far apply to the more 
common tractor -trailer combinations. However, 
there are other ways of coupling and uncoupling the 
many types of truck -trailer and tractor -trailer 
combinations that are in use. There are too many to 
cover in this manual. You will need to l earn the 
correct way to couple  and uncouple the vehicle(s) 
you will drive according to the manufacturer and/or 
owner specifications. 
 
7.3 – Inspecting Doubles and Triples 
 
Use the seven-step inspection procedure described 
in Section 2 to inspect your combination vehicle. 
There are more things to inspect on a combination 
vehicle than on a single vehicle. Many of these 
items are simply more of what you would find on a 
single vehicle. (For example, tires, wheels, lights, 
reflectors, etc.) However, there are also some new 
things to check. These are discussed below. 
 
7.3.1 – Additional Checks 
 
Do these checks in addition to those already listed 
in Section 2, Step 5: Do a Walk-around Inspection. 
 
Coupling System Areas 
Check fifth wheel (lower). 
Securely mounted to frame. 
No missing or damaged parts. 
Enough grease. 
No visible space betwe en upper and lower fifth 
wheel. 
Locking jaws around the shank, not the head of 
kingpin. 
Release arm properly seated and safety latch/lock 
engaged. 
Check fifth wheel (upper). 
Glide plate securely mounted to trailer frame. 
Kingpin not damaged. 
Air and electric lines to trailer. 
Electrical cord firmly plugged in and secured. 
Air-lines properly connected to glad hands, no air 
leaks, properly secured with enough slack for turns. 
All lines free from damage. 
Sliding fifth wheel. 
Slide not damaged or parts missing. 
Properly greased. 
All locking pins present and locked in place. 
If air powered, no air leaks. 
Check that fifth wheel is not so far forward that the 
tractor frame will hit landing gear, or cab will hit the 
trailer, during turns. 
Landing Gear 
Fully raised, no missing parts, not bent or 
otherwise damaged. 
Crank handle in place and secured. 
If power operated, no air or hydraulic leaks. 
 
Double and Triple Trailers 
Shut-off valves (at rear of trailers, in service and 
emergency lines). 
Rear of front trailers:  OPEN. 
Rear of last trailer:  CLOSED. 
--- PAGE 105 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 7 - Doubles and Triples Page 7-4 
Version: July 2017 
Converter dolly air tank drain valve:  CLOSED. 
Be sure air-lines are supported and glad hands are 
properly connected. 
If spare tire is carried on converter gear (dolly), 
make sure it's secured. 
Be sure pintle-eye of dolly is in place in pintle hook 
of trailer(s). 
Make sure pintle hook is latched. 
Safety chains should be secured to trailer(s). 
Be sure light cords are firmly in sockets on trailers. 
 
7.3.2 – Additional Things to Check during a 
Walk-around Inspection 
Do these checks in addition to subsection 5.3, 
Inspecting Air Brake Systems. 
 
 
7.4 – Doubles/Triples Air Brake Check 
Check the brakes on a double or triple trailer as you 
would any combination vehicle. Subsection 6.5.2 
explains how to check air brakes on combinatio n 
vehicles. You must also make the following checks 
on your double or triple trailers 
 
7.4.1 – Additional Air Brake Checks 
Check That Air Flows to All Trailers (Double and 
Triple Trailers). Use the tractor parking brake 
and/or chock the wheels to hold the vehicle. Wait for 
air pressure to reach normal, then push in the red 
"trailer air supply" knob. This will supply air to the 
emergency (supply) lines. Use the trailer handbrake 
to provide air to the service line. Go to the rear of 
the rig. Open the emergenc y line shut -off valve at 
the rear of the last trailer. You should hear air 
escaping, showing the entire system is charged. 
Close the emergency line valve. Open the service 
line valve to check that service pressure goes 
through all the trailers (this test a ssumes that the 
trailer handbrake or the service brake pedal is on), 
and then close the valve. If you do NOT hear air 
escaping from both lines, check that the shut -off 
valves on the trailer(s) and dolly(ies) are in the 
OPEN position. You MUST have air all the way to 
the back for all the brakes to work. 
Test Tractor Protection Valve. Charge the trailer 
air brake system. (That is, build up normal air 
pressure and push the "air supply" knob in.) Shut 
the engine off. Step on and off the brake pedal 
several times to reduce the air pressure in the tanks. 
The trailer air supply control (also called the tractor 
protection valve control) should pop out (or go from 
"normal" to "emergency" position) when the air 
pressure falls into the pressure range specified by 
the manufacturer. (Usually within the range of 20 to 
45 psi.) 
If the tractor protection valve doesn't work properly, 
an air hose or trailer brake leak could drain all the 
air from the tractor. This would cause the 
emergency brakes to come on, with possible loss of 
control. 
Test Trailer Emergency Brakes. Charge the trailer 
air brake system and check that the trailer rolls 
freely. Then stop and pull out the trailer air supply 
control (also called tractor protection valve control 
or trailer emergency valve) or plac e it in the 
"emergency" position. Pull gently on the trailer with 
the tractor to check that the trailer emergency 
brakes are on. 
Test Trailer Service Brakes. Check for normal air 
pressure, release the parking brakes, move the 
vehicle forward slowly, and apply trailer brakes with 
the hand control (trolley valve), if so equipped. You 
should feel the brakes come on. This tells you the 
trailer brakes are connected and working. (The 
trailer brakes should be tested with the hand valve, 
but controlled in normal op eration with the foot 
pedal, which applies air to the service brakes at all 
wheels.) 
 
Section 7  
Test Your Knowledge 
 
1. What is a converter dolly? 
2. Do converter dollies have spring brakes? 
3. What three methods can you use to secure a 
second trailer before coupling? 
4. How do you check to make sure trailer height 
is correct before coupling? 
5. What do you check when making a visual 
check of coupling? 
6. Why should you pull a dolly out from under a 
trailer before you disconnect it from the trailer 
in front? 
7. What should you  check for when inspecting 
the converter dolly? The pintle hook? 
8. Should the shut -off valves on the rear of the 
last trailer be open or closed? On the first 
trailer in a set of doubles? On the middle 
trailer of a set of triples? 
9. How can you test that air flows to all trailers? 
10. How do you know if your converter dolly is 
equipped with antilock brakes? 
 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read Section 7.
 
--- PAGE 106 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
