Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-1 
Version: July 2017 
Section 9  
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
This Section Covers 
 The Intent of the Regulations
 Bulk Tank Loading, Unloading, and
Marking
 Driver Responsibilities
 Driving and Parking Rules
 Communications Rules
 Emergencies
 Loading and Unloading
Hazardous materials are products that pose a risk 
to health, safety, and property during transportation. 
The term often is shortened to HAZMAT, which you 
may see on road signs, or to HM in government 
regulations. Hazardous materials include 
explosives, various types of gas, solids, flammable 
and combustible liquid, and other materials. 
Because of the risks involved and the potential 
consequences these risks impose, all levels of 
government regulate the handling of hazardous 
materials. 
The Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR) is 
found in parts  171 - 180 of title 49 of the Code of 
Federal Regulations. The common reference for 
these regulations is 49 CFR  171 - 180 
The Hazardous Materials Table in the regulations 
contains a list of these items. However, this list is 
not all-inclusive. Whether or not a material is 
considered hazardous is based on its 
characteristics and the shipper's decision on 
whether or not the material meets a definition of a 
hazardous material in the regulations. 
The regulations require vehicles transporting certain 
types or quantities of hazardous materials to display 
diamond-shaped, square on point, warning signs 
called placards. 
This section is designed to assist you in 
understanding your role and responsibilities in 
hauling hazardous materials. Due to the constantly 
changing nature of government regulations, it is 
impossible to guarantee absolute accuracy of the 
materials in this section. An up- to-date copy of the 
complete regulations is essential for you to have. 
Included in these regulations is a complete glossary 
of terms. 
You must have a commercial driver license (CDL) 
with a hazardous materials endorsement before you 
drive any size vehicle that is used to transport 
hazardous material as defined in 49 CFR 383.5. 
You must pass a written test about the regulations 
and requirements to get this endorsement.  
Everything you need to know to pass the written test 
is in this section. However, this is only a beginning. 
Most drivers need to know much more on the job. 
You can learn more by reading and understanding 
the federal and state rules applicable to hazardous 
materials, as well as, attending hazardous materials 
training courses. Your employer, colleges and 
universities, and various associations usually offer 
these courses. You can get copies of the Federal 
Regulations (49 CFR) through your local 
Government Printing Office bookstore and various 
industry publishers. Union or company offices often 
have copies of the rules for driver use. Find out 
where you can get your own copy to use on the job. 
The regulations require training and testing for all 
drivers involved in transporting hazardous 
materials. Your employer or a designated 
representative is required to provide this training 
and testing. Hazardous materials employers are 
required to keep a record of training for each 
employee as long as that employee is working with 
hazardous materials, and for 90 days thereafter. 
The regulations require that hazardous materials 
employees be trained and tested at least once every 
three years. 
All drivers must be trained in the security risks of 
hazardous materials transportation. This training 
must include how to recognize and respond to 
possible security threats. 
The regulations also require that drivers have 
special training before driving a vehicle transporting 
certain flammable gas materials or highway route 
controlled quantities of radioactive materials. I n 
addition, drivers transporting cargo tanks and 
portable tanks must receive specialized training. 
Each driver’s employer or his or her designated 
representative must provide such training. 
Some locations require permits to transport certain 
explosives or bulk hazardous wastes. States and 
counties also may require drivers to follow special 
hazardous materials routes. The federal 
government may require permits or exemptions for 
special hazardous materials cargo such as rocket 
fuel. Find out about permits, exemptions, and 
special routes for the places you drive.  
--- PAGE 109 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-2  
Version: July 2017 
9.1 – The Intent of the Regulations 
 
9.1.1 – Contain the Material 
 
Transporting hazardous materials can be risky. The 
regulations are intended to protect you, those 
around you, and the environment. They tell shippers 
how to package the materials safely and drivers how 
to load, transport, and unload the material. These 
are called "containment rules." 
 
9.1.2 – Communicate the Risk 
 
To communicate the risk, shippers must warn 
drivers and others about the material's hazards. The 
regulations require shippers to put hazard warning 
labels on packages, provide proper shipping 
papers, emergency response information, and 
placards. These steps communicate the hazard to 
the shipper, the carrier, and the driver. 
 
9.1.3 – Assure Safe Drivers and Equipment 
 
In order to get a hazardous materials endorsement 
on a CDL, you must pass a written test about 
transporting hazardous materials. To pass the test, 
you must know how to: 
Identify what are hazardous materials. 
Safely load shipments. 
Properly placard your vehicle in accordance with 
the rules. 
Safely transport shipments. 
 
Learn the rules and follow them. Following the rules 
reduces the risk of injury from hazardous materials. 
Taking shortcuts by breaking rules is unsa fe. Non-
compliance with regulations can result in fines and 
jail. 
 
Inspect your vehicle before and during each trip. 
Law enforcement officers may stop and inspect your 
vehicle. When stopped, they may check your 
shipping papers, vehicle placards, and the 
hazardous materials endorsement on your driver 
license, and your knowledge of hazardous 
materials. 
 
9.2 – Hazardous Materials 
Transportation—Who Does What 
 
9.2.1 – The Shipper 
Sends products from one place to another by truck, 
rail, vessel, or airplane. 
Uses the hazardous materials regulations to 
determine the product’s: 
Identification number 
Proper shipping name. 
Hazard class. 
Packing group. 
Correct packaging. 
Correct label and markings. 
Correct placards. 
Must package, mark, and label the materials; 
prepare shipping papers; provide emergency 
response information; and supply placards. 
Certify on the shipping paper that the shipment has 
been prepared according to the rules (unless you 
are pulling cargo tanks supplied by you or your 
employer).  
 
9.2.2 – The Carrier 
Takes the shipment from the shipper to its 
destination. 
Prior to transportation, checks that the shipper 
correctly described, marked, labeled, and 
otherwise prepared the shipment for transportation. 
Refuses improper shipments. 
 
9.2.3 – The Driver 
Makes sure the shipper has identified, marked, and 
labeled the hazardous materials properly. 
Refuses leaking packages and shipments. 
Placards vehicle when loading, if required. 
Safely transports the shipment without delay. 
Follows all special rules about transporting 
hazardous materials. 
Keeps hazardous materials shipping papers and 
emergency response information in the proper 
place. 
Reports accidents and incidents involving 
hazardous materials to the proper government 
agency, when the accident/incident occurs w hile 
driver is in physical control of the shipment. 
 
9.3 – Communication Rules 
 
9.3.1 – Definitions 
 
Some words and phrases have special meanings 
when talking about hazardous materials. Some of 
these may differ from meanings you are used to. 
The words and phrases in this section may be on  
your test. The meanings of other important words 
are in the glossary at the end of Section 9. 
--- PAGE 110 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-3 
Version: July 2017 
A material's hazard class reflects the risks 
associated with it. There are nine different hazard 
classes. The types of materials included in these 
nine classes are in Figure 9.1. 
Hazardous Materials Class 
Class 
Division Name of Class or 
Division Examples 
1 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
1.6 
Mass Explosion 
Projection Hazard 
Fire Hazard 
Minor Explosion 
Very Insensitive 
Extremely 
Insensitive 
Dynamite 
Flares 
Display Fireworks 
Ammunition 
Blasting Agents 
Explosive Devices 
2 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
Flammable Gases 
Non-Flammable 
Gases 
Poisonous/Toxic 
Gases 
Propane 
Helium 
Fluorine, Compressed 
3 - Flammable Liquids Gasoline 
4 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
Flammable Solids 
Spontaneously 
Combustible 
Dangerous When 
Wet 
Ammonium Picrate, 
Wetted 
White Phosphorus 
Sodium 
5 5.1 
5.2 
Oxidizers 
Organic Peroxides 
Ammonium Nitrate 
Methyl Ethyl Ketone 
Peroxide 
6 
6.1 
6.2 
Poison (Toxic 
Material) 
Infectious 
Substances 
Potassium Cyanide 
Anthrax Virus 
7 - Radioactive Uranium 
8 - Corrosives Battery Fluid 
9 - Miscellaneous 
Hazardous Materials 
Polychlorinated 
Biphenyls (PCB) 
N
o
n
e 
- 
ORM-D (Other 
Regulated Material-
Domestic) 
Food Flavorings, 
Medicines 
- Combustible Liquids Fuel Oil 
Figure 9.1 
A shipping paper describes the hazardous materials 
being transported. Shipping orders, bills of lading, 
and manifests are all shipping papers. Figure 9.6 
shows an example shipping paper. 
After an accident or hazardous materials spill or 
leak, you may be injured and unable to 
communicate the hazards of the materials you are 
transporting. Firefighters and police can prevent or 
reduce the amount of damage or injury at the scene 
if they know what hazardous materials are 
being carried. Your life, and the lives of others, may 
depend on quickly locating the hazardous materials 
shipping papers. For that reason the rules require: 
Shippers to describe hazardous materials correctly 
and include an emergency response telephone 
number on shipping papers. 
Carriers and drivers to quickly identify hazardous 
materials shipping papers, or keep them on top of 
other shipping papers and keep the required 
emergency response information with the shipping 
papers. 
Drivers to keep hazardous materials shipping 
papers: 
In a pouch on the driver's door, or 
In clear view within immediate reach while the seat 
belt is fastened while driving, or 
On the driver's seat when out of the vehicle. 
9.3.2 – Package Labels 
Shippers put diamond-shaped hazard warning 
labels on most hazardous materials packages. 
These labels inform others of the hazard. If the 
diamond label won't fit on the package, shippers 
may put the label on a tag securely attached to the 
package. For example, compressed gas cylinders 
that will not hold a label will have tags or decals. 
Labels look like the examples in Figure 9.2.  
Examples of HAZMAT Labels. Figure 9.2 

--- PAGE 111 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-4  
Version: July 2017 
 
 
9.3.3 – Lists of Regulated Products 
 
Placards. Placards are used to warn others of 
hazardous materials. Placards are signs put on the 
outside of a vehicle and on bulk packages, which 
identify the hazard class of the cargo. A placarded 
vehicle must have at least four identical placards. 
 
They are put on the front, rear, and both sides of the 
vehicle. See Figure 9.3. Placards must be readable 
from all four directions. They are at least 250mm 
9.84 inches square, square -on-point, in a diamond 
shape. Cargo tanks and other bulk packaging 
display the identification number of their contents on 
placards or orange panels or white square-on-point 
displays that are the same size as placards. 
 
 
 
Examples of HAZMAT Placards 
Figure 9.3 
 
Identification numbers are a four-digit code used by 
first responders to identify hazardous materials. An 
identification number may be used to identify more 
than one chemical . The letters “NA or “UN” will 
precede the identification number. The United 
States Department of Transportation’s Emergency 
Response Guidebook (ERG) lists the chemicals and 
the identification numbers assigned to them. 
 
There are three main lists used by s hippers, 
carriers, and drivers when trying to identify 
hazardous materials. Before transporting a material, 
look for its name on three lists. Some materials are 
on all lists, others on only one. Always check the 
following lists: 
Section 172.101, the Hazardous Materials Table.  
Appendix A to Section 172.101, the List of 
Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities. 
Appendix B to Section 172.101, the List of Marine 
Pollutants. 
 
The Hazardous Materials Table. Figure 9.4 shows 
part of the Hazardous Materials Table.  
 
Column 1  tells which shipping mode(s) the entry 
affects and other information concerning the 
shipping description. The next five columns show 
each material's shipping name, hazard class or 
division, identification number, packaging group, 
and required labels. 
 
Six different symbols may appear in Column 1 of the 
table. 
 
(+) Shows the proper shipping name, hazard 
class, and packing group to use, even if the 
material doesn't meet the hazard class 
definition. 
(A) Means the hazardous material described in 
Column 2 is subject to the HMR only when 
offered or intended for transport by air 
unless it is a hazardous substance or 
hazardous waste. 
(W) Means the hazardous material described in 
Column 2 is subject to the HMR only when 
offered or intended for trans portation by 
water unless it is a hazardous substance, 
hazardous waste, or marine pollutant. 
(D) Means the proper shipping name is 
appropriate for describing materials for 
domestic transportation, but may not be 
proper for international transportation.  
(I) Identifies a proper shipping name that is 
used to describe materials in international 
transportation. A different shipping name 
may be used when only domestic 
transportation is involved. 
  (G) Means this hazardous material described in 
Column 2 is a gene ric shipping name. A 
generic shipping name must be 
accompanied by a technical name on the 
shipping paper. A technical name is a 
specific chemical that makes the product 
hazardous 
Column 2  lists the proper shipping names and 
descriptions of regulated materi als. Entries are in 
alphabetical order so you can more quickly find the 
right entry. The table shows proper shipping names 
in regular type. The shipping paper must show 
proper shipping names. Names shown in italics are 
not proper shipping names. 
 

--- PAGE 112 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-5 
Version: July 2017 
Figure 9.4 
Figure 9.5 
Column 3  shows a material's hazard class or 
division, or the entry "Forbidden." Never transport a 
"Forbidden" material. Placard hazardous materials 
shipments based on the quantity and hazard class. 
You can decide which placards to use if you know 
these three things: 
Material's hazard class. 
Amount being shipped. 
Amount of all hazardous materials of all classes on 
your vehicle.  
Column 4  lists the identification number for each 
proper shipping name. Identification numbers are 
preceded by the letters “UN”, "NA." or “ID”.  The 
letters "NA" are associated with proper shipping 
names that are only used within the United States 
and to and from Canada. The letters “ID” are 
associated with proper shipping names recognized 
by the International Civil Aviation Organization 
(IACO) Technical instructions for transportation by 
air. The identification number must appear on the 
shipping paper as part of the shipping description 
and also appear on the package. It also must 
appear on cargo tanks and other bulk packaging. 
Police and firefighters use this number to quickly 
identify the hazardous materials. 
Column 5  shows the packing group (in Roman 
numeral) assigned to a material. 
Column 6  shows the hazard warning label(s) 
shippers must put on packages of hazardous 
materials. Some products require use of more than 
one label due to a multiple hazards being present.  
49 CFR 172.101 Hazardous Materials Table 
Symbols 
Hazardous Materials 
Description & Proper 
Shipping Names 
Hazard 
Class or 
Division 
Identification 
Numbers PG Label 
Codes 
Special 
Provisions 
(172.102) 
Packaging (173. ***) 
Exceptions Non 
Bulk Bulk 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8A) (8B) (8C) 
A Acetaldehyde ammonia 9 UN1841 III 9 IB8, IP3, 
IP7, T1, 
TP33 
155 204 240 
Appendix A to 49 CFR 172.101 
List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities 
Hazardous Substances Reportable Quantity (RQ) Pounds 
(Kilograms) 
Phenyl mercaptan 100 (45.4) 
Phenylmercury acetate 100 (45.4) 
Phenylthiourea 100 (45.4) 
Phorate 10 (4.54) 
Phosgene 10 (4.54) 
Phosphine 100  (45.4) 
Phosphoric acid 5,000 (2270) 
Phosphoric acid, diethyl 
4-nitrophenyl ester 100 (45.4) 
Phosphoric acid, lead (2+) 
Salt (2:3)salt 10 (.454) 
--- PAGE 113 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-6  
Version: July 2017 
Column 7  lists the additional (special) provisions 
that apply to this material. When there is an entry in 
this column, you must refer to the federal 
regulations for specific information. The numbers 1-
6 in this column mean the hazardous material is a 
poison inhalation hazard (PIH). PIH materials have 
special requirements f or shipping papers, marking, 
and placards. 
Column 8  is a three -part column showing the 
section numbers covering the packaging 
requirements for each hazardous material. 
 
Note: Columns 9 and 10 do not apply to 
transportation by highway. 
 
Appendix A to 49 CFR  172.101 - The List of 
Hazardous Substances and Reportable 
Quantities. The DOT and the EPA want to know 
about spills of hazardous substances. They are 
named in the List of Hazardous Substances and 
Reportable Quantities. See Figure 9.5. Column 2 of 
the list  shows each product's reportable quantity 
(RQ). When these materials are being transported 
in a reportable quantity or greater in one package, 
the shipper displays the letters RQ on the shipping 
paper and package. The letters RQ may appear 
before or after the basic description. You or your 
employer must report any spill of these materials, 
which occurs in a reportable quantity. 
 
If the words INHALATION HAZARD appear on the 
shipping paper or package, the rules require display 
of the POISON INHALATION HAZARD or POISON 
GAS placards, as appropriate. These placards must 
be used in addition to other placards, which may be 
required by the product's hazard class. Always 
display the hazard class placard and the POISON 
INHALATION HAZARD placard, even for small 
amounts. 
 
Appendix B to 49 CFR 172.101 – List of Marine 
Pollutants 
Appendix B is a listing of chemicals that are toxic to 
marine life. For highway transportation, this list is 
only used for chemicals in a container with a 
capacity of 119 gallons or more without a placard or 
label as specified by the HMR. 
 
Any bulk packages of a Marine Pollutant must 
display the Marine Pollutant marking (white triangle 
with a fish and an “X” through the fish). This marking 
(it is not a placard) must also be displayed on the 
outside of the vehicle. In addition, a notation must 
be made on the shipping papers near the 
description of the material:  “Marine Pollutant”. 
 
9.3.4 – The Shipping Paper 
The shipping paper shown in Figure 9.6 describes a 
shipment. A shipping paper for hazardous materials 
must include: 
Page numbers if the shipping paper has more than 
one page. The first page must tell the total number 
of pages. For example, "Page 1 of 4". 
A proper shipping description for each hazardous 
material. 
A shipper's certification, signed by the shipper, 
saying they prepared the shipment according to 
the regulations. 
 
Shipping Paper 
TO: 
ABC 
Corporation 
88 Valley 
Street 
Anywhere, 
VA 
FROM
: 
DEF 
Corporatio
n 
55 
Mountain 
Street 
Nowhere, 
CO 
Page 
1 of 1 
Quantity HM Description Weight 
1 
cylinder 
 
 
RQ 
 
 
 
(“RQ” 
means that 
this is a 
reportable 
quantity.) 
UN1076,Phosgene
, 2.3,  
Poison, Inhalation 
Hazard,  
Zone A 
 
(UN1076 is the 
Identification 
Number from 
Column 4 of the 
Hazardous 
materials Table.  
Phosgene is the 
proper shipping 
name from Column 
2 of the Hazardous 
Materials Table.   
2.3 is the Hazard 
Class from Column 
3 of the Hazardous 
Materials Table.)  
25 lbs 
This is to certify that the above named materials are 
properly classified, described, packaged , marked and 
labeled, and are in proper condi tion for transportation 
according to the applicable regulations of the 
Department of Transportation. 
 
 
Shipper
: 
Per: 
Date: 
 
DEF 
Corporatio
n 
Smith 
October 15, 
2003 
  
Carrier: 
Per: 
Date: 
 
Safet
y First 
Special Instructions:   24 hour Emergency Contact, 
John Smith 1-800-555-5555 
Figure 9.6 
 
--- PAGE 114 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-7  
Version: July 2017 
9.3.5 – The Item Description 
 
If a shipping paper describes both hazardous and 
non-hazardous products, the hazardous materials  
must be:  
Entered first. 
Highlighted in a contrasting color, OR. 
Identified by an "X" placed before the shipping 
description (ID#, Shipping Name, Hazard Class, 
Packing Group) in a column captioned "HM". The 
letters "RQ" may be used instead of "X" if a 
reportable quantity needs to be identified. 
 
The basic description of hazardous materials 
includes the identification number, proper shipping 
name, hazard class or division, and the packing 
group, if any, in that order. The packing group is 
displayed in Roman numerals and may be preceded 
by "PG". 
 
Identification number, s hipping name,  and hazard 
class must not be abbreviated unless specifically 
authorized in the hazardous materials regulations. 
The description must also show: 
The total quantity and unit of measure. 
The number and type of packages (example: “6 
Drums”). 
The letters RQ, if a reportable quantity. 
If the letters RQ appear, the name of the 
hazardous substance (if not included in the 
shipping name). 
For all materials with the letter “G” (Generic) in 
Column 1, the technical name of the hazardous 
material. 
 
Shipping papers also must list an emerg ency 
response telephone number (unless excepted). The 
emergency response telephone number is the 
responsibility of the shipper. It can be used by 
emergency responders to obtain information about 
any hazardous materials involved in a spill or fire.   
The telephone number must be: 
 
The number of the person offering the hazardous 
material for transportation (if the shipper/offerer is 
the emergency response information  (ERI) 
provider); or 
 
The number of an agency or organization capable 
of, and accepting respon sibility for, providing the 
detailed information required by paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section. The person who is registered with the 
ERI provider must be identified by name, or contract 
number or other unique identifier assigned by the 
ERI provider, on the shipping paper 
 
Shippers also must provide emergency response 
information to the motor carrier for each hazardous 
material being shipped. The emergency response 
information must be able to be used away from the 
motor vehicle and must provide information on how 
to safely handle incidents involving the material. At 
a mini mum, i t must include the following 
information: 
The basic description and technical name; 
Immediate hazards to health; 
Risks of fire or explosion; 
Immediate precautions to be taken in the ev ent of 
an accident or incident; 
Immediate methods for handling fires; 
Initial methods for handling spills or leaks in the 
absence of fires; and 
Preliminary first aid measures 
 
Such information can be on the shipping paper or 
some other document that includ es the basic 
description and technical name of the hazardous 
material. Or, it may be in a guidance book such as 
the Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG). Motor 
carriers may assist shippers by keeping an ERG on 
each vehicle carrying hazardous materials. The 
driver must provide the emergency response 
information to any federal, state, or local authority 
responding to a hazardous materials incident or 
investigating one. 
 
Total quantity and number & type of packages must 
appear before or after the basic descripti on. The 
packaging type and the unit of measurement may 
be abbreviated. For example: 
 
 10 ctns. UN1263, Paint, 3, PG II, 500 lbs. 
 
The shipper of hazardous wastes must put the word 
WASTE before the proper shipping name of the 
material on the shipping paper (hazardous waste 
manifest). For example: 
 
 UN1090, Waste Acetone, 3, PG II. 
 
A non-hazardous material may not be described by 
using a hazard class or an identification number. 
 
Shippers must keep a copy of shipping papers (or 
an electronic image) for a period of 2 years (3 years 
for hazardous waste) after the material is accepted 
by the initial carrier. 
 
If one provides a carrier service only and is not the 
originator of the shipment, a carrier is required to 
keep a copy of the shipping paper (or an electro nic 
image) for a period of 1 year. 
--- PAGE 115 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-8  
Version: July 2017 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE:  To view complete regulatory 
requirements for the transportation of hazardous 
materials one should refer to the Code of Federal 
Regulations, Title 49, Parts 171-185.  
 
9.3.6 – Shipper's Certification 
When the shipper packages hazardous materials, 
he/she certifies that the package has been prepared 
according to the rules. The signed shipper's 
certification appears on the original shipping paper. 
The only exceptions are when a shipper is a private 
carrier transporting their own product and when the 
package is provided by the carrier (for example, a 
cargo tank). Unless a package is clearly unsafe or 
does not comply with the HMR, you may accept the 
shipper's certification concerning proper packaging. 
Some carrie rs have additional rules about 
transporting hazardous materials. Follow your 
employer's rules when accepting shipments. 
 
9.3.7 – Package Markings and Labels 
 
Shippers print required markings directly on the 
package, an attached label, or tag. An important 
package marking is the name of the hazardous 
material. It is the same name as the one on the 
shipping paper. The requirements for marking vary 
by package size and material being transported. 
When required, the shipper will put the following on 
the package: 
The name and address of shipper or consignee. 
The hazardous material's shipping name and 
identification number. 
The labels required. 
 
It is a good idea to compare the shipping paper to 
the markings and labels. Always make sure that the 
shipper shows the c orrect basic description on the 
shipping paper, and verifies that the proper labels 
are shown on the packages. If you are not familiar 
with the material, ask the shipper to contact your 
office.  
 
If rules require it, the shipper will put RQ, MARINE 
POLLUTANT, BIOHAZARD, HOT, or 
INHALATION-HAZARD on the package. Packages 
with liquid containers inside will also have package 
orientation markings with the arrows pointing in the 
correct upright direction. The labels used always 
reflect the hazard class of the product. If a package 
needs more than one label, the labels must be close 
together, near the proper shipping name. 
 
9.3.8 – Recognizing Hazardous Materials 
 
Learn to recognize shipments of hazardous 
materials. To find out if the shipment includes 
hazardous materials, look at the shipping paper. 
Does it have: 
An entry with a proper shipping name, hazard 
class, and identification number? 
A highlighted entry, or one with an X or RQ in the 
hazardous materials column? 
Other clues suggesting hazardous materials: 
What business is the shipper in? Paint dealer? 
Chemical supply? Scientific supply house? Pest 
control or agricultural supplier? Explosives, 
munitions, or fireworks dealer? 
Are there tanks with diamond labels or placards on 
the premises? 
What type of package is being shipped? Cylinders 
and drums are often used for hazardous materials 
shipments. 
Is a hazard class label, proper shipping name, or 
identification number on the package? 
Are there any handling precautions? 
 
9.3.9 – Hazardous Waste Manifest 
 
When tra nsporting hazardous wastes, you must 
sign by hand and carry a Uniform Hazardous Waste 
Manifest. The name and EPA registration number of 
the shippers, carriers, and destination must appear 
on the manifest. Shippers must prepare, date, and 
sign by hand the m anifest. Treat the manifest as a 
shipping paper when transporting the waste. Only 
give the waste shipment to another registered 
carrier or disposal/treatment facility. Each carrier 
transporting the shipment must sign by hand the 
manifest. After you deliver the shipment, keep your 
copy of the manifest. Each copy must have all 
needed signatures and dates, including those of the 
person to whom you delivered the waste.  
 
9.3.10 – Placarding 
 
Attach the appropriate placards to the vehicle 
before you drive it. You are only allowed to move an 
improperly placarded vehicle during an emergency, 
in order to protect life or property. 
Placards must appear on both sides and both ends 
of the vehicle. Each placard must be: 
Easily seen from the direction it faces. 
Placed so the words or numbers are level and read 
from left to right. 
--- PAGE 116 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-9 
Version: July 2017 
At least three inches away from any other 
markings. 
Kept clear of attachments or devices such as 
ladders, doors, and tarpaulins. 
Kept clean and undamaged so that the color, 
format, and message are easily seen. 
Be affixed to a background of contrasting color. 
The use of “Drive Safely” and other slogans is 
prohibited. 
The front placard may be on the front of the tractor 
or the front of the trailer. 
To decide which placards to use, you need to know: 
The hazard class of the materials. 
The amount of hazardous materials shipped. 
The total weight of all classes of hazardous 
materials in your vehicle. 
9.3.11 – Placard Tables 
There are two placard tables, Table 1 and Table 2. 
Table 1 materials must be placarded whenever any 
amount is transported. See Figure 9.7. 
Except for bulk packaging, the hazard classes in 
Table 2 need placards only if the total amount 
transported is 1,001 pounds or more including the 
package. Add the amounts from all shipping papers 
for all the Table 2 products you have on board. See 
Figure 9.8. 
Placard Table 1 
Any Amount 
IF YOUR VEHICLE 
CONTAINS ANY AMOUNT 
OF……
PLACARD AS…
1.1 Mass Explosives Explosives 1.1 
1.2 Project Hazards Explosives 1.2 
1.3 Mass Fire Hazards Explosives 1.3 
2.3 Poisonous/Toxic Gases Poison Gas 
4.3 Dangerous When Wet Dangerous When 
Wet 
5.2 (Organic Peroxide, Type 
B, liquid or solid, 
Temperature controlled) 
Organic Peroxide 
6.1 (Inhalation hazard zone 
A & B only) 
Poison/toxic 
inhalation 
7 (Radioactive Yellow III 
label only) Radioactive 
Figure 9.7 
You may use DANGEROUS placards instead of 
separate placards for each Table 2 hazard class 
when: 
You have 1,001 pounds or more of two or more 
Table 2 hazard classes, requiring different 
placards, and 
You have not loaded 2,205 pounds or more of any 
Table 2 hazard class material at any one place. 
(You must use the specific placard for this 
material.) 
The dangerous placard is an option, not a 
requirement. You can always placard for the 
materials. 
If the words INHALATION HAZARD are on the 
shipping paper or package, you must display 
POISON GAS or POISON INHALATION placards in 
addition to any other placards needed by the 
product's hazard class. The 1,000 pound exception 
does not apply to these materials. 
Materials with a secondary hazard of dangerous 
when wet must display the DANGEROUS WHEN 
WET placard in addition to any other placards 
needed by the product’s hazard class. The 1,000 -
pound exception to placarding does not apply to 
these materials. 
Placard Table 2 
1,001 Pounds Or More 
Category of Material (Hazard 
class or division number and 
additional description, as 
appropriate) 
Placard Name 
1.4 Minor Explosion Explosives 1.4 
1.5 Very Insensitive Explosives 1.5 
1.6 Extremely Insensitive Explosives 1.6 
2.1 Flammable Gases Flammable Gas 
2.2 Non- Flammable Gases Non-Flammable Gas. 
3 Flammable Liquids Flammable 
Combustible Liquid Combustible* 
4.1 Flammable Solids Flammable Solid 
4.2 Spontaneously 
Combustible 
Spontaneously 
Combustible 
5.1 Oxidizers Oxidizer 
5.2 (other than organic 
peroxide, Type B, liquid or 
solid, Temperature 
Controlled) 
Organic Peroxide 
6.1 (other than inhalation 
hazard zone A or B) Poison 
6.2 Infectious Substances (None) 
8 Corrosives Corrosive 
9 Miscellaneous Hazardous 
Materials Class 9** 
ORM-D (None) 
* FLAMMABLE may be used in place of a
COMBUSTIBLE on a cargo tank or portable tank. 
**   Class 9 Placard is not required for domestic 
transportation.  
Figure 9.8 
--- PAGE 117 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-10 
Version: July 2017 
Placards used to identify the primary or subsidiary 
hazard class of a material must have the hazard 
class or division number displayed in the lower 
corner of the placard. Permanently affixed 
subsidiary hazard placards without the hazard class 
number may be used as long as they stay within 
color specifications.  
Placards may be displayed for hazardous materials 
even if not required so long as the placard identifies 
the hazard of the material being transported. 
Bulk packaging is a single container with a capacity 
greater than 119 gallons. A bulk package, and a 
vehicle transporting a bulk package, must be 
placarded, even if it only has the residue of a 
hazardous material. Certain bulk packages only 
have to be placarded on the two opposite sides or 
may display labels. All other bulk packages must be 
placarded on all four sides. 
Subsections 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. Shippers package in order to (fill in the
blank) the material.
2. Driver placard their vehicle to (fill in the
blank) the risk.
3. What three things do you need to know to
decide which placards (if any) you need?
4. A hazardous materials identification
number must appear on the (fill in the blank)
and on the (fill in the blank). The
identification number must also appear on
cargo tanks and other bulk packaging.
5. Where must you keep shipping papers
describing hazardous materials?
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 9.1, 9.2 and 
9.3. 
9.4 – Loading and Unloading 
Do all you can to protect containers of hazardous 
materials. Don't use any tools, which might damage 
containers or other packaging during loading. Don't 
use hooks. 
9.4.1 – General Loading Requirements 
Before loading or unloading, set the parking brake. 
Make sure the vehicle will not move. 
Many products become more hazardous when 
exposed to heat. Load hazardous materials away 
from heat sources. 
Watch for signs of leaking or damaged containers:  
LEAKS SPELL TROUBLE! Do not transport leaking 
packages. Depending on the material, you, your 
truck, and others could be in danger. It is illegal to 
move a vehicle with leaking hazardous materials. 
Containers of hazardous materials must be braced 
to prevent movement of the packages during 
transportation. 
No Smoking.  When loading or unloading 
hazardous materials, keep fire away. Don't let 
people smoke nearby. Never smoke around: 
Class 1 (Explosives) 
Class 2.1 (Flammable Gas ) 
Class 3 (Flammable Liquids) 
Class 4 (Flammable Solids) 
Class 5 (Oxidizers) 
Secure Against Movement.  Brace containers so 
they will not fall, slide, or bounce around during 
transportation. Be very careful when loading 
containers that have valves or other fittings. All 
hazardous materials packages must be secured 
during transportation. 
After loading, do not open any package during your 
trip. Never transfer hazardous materials from one 
package to another while in transit. You may empty 
a cargo tank, but do not empty any other package 
while it is on the vehicle. 
Cargo Heater Rules. There are special cargo heater 
rules for loading: 
Class 1 (Explosives) 
Class 2.1 (Flammable Gas ) 
Class 3 (Flammable Liquids) 
The rules usually forbid use of cargo heaters, 
including automatic cargo heater/air conditioner 
units. Unless you have read all the related rules, 
don't load the above products in a cargo space that 
has a heater. 
Use Closed Cargo Space.  You cannot have 
overhang or tailgate loads of: 
Class 1 (Explosives) 
Class 4 (Flammable Solids) 
Class 5 (Oxidizers) 
--- PAGE 118 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
