Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-11 
Version: July 2017 
You must load these hazardous materials into a 
closed cargo space unless all packages are: 
Fire and water resistant. 
Covered with a fire and water resistant tarp. 
Precautions for Specific Hazards 
Class 1 (Explosives) Materials. Turn your engine 
off before loading or unloading any explosives. 
Then check the cargo space. You must: 
Disable cargo heaters. Disconnect heater power 
sources and drain heater fuel tanks. 
Make sure there are no sharp points that might 
damage cargo. Look for bolts, screws, nails, 
broken side panels, and broken floorboards. 
Use a floor lining with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3.   
The floors must be tight and the liner must be 
either non-metallic material or non-ferrous metal. 
(Non-ferrous metals are any metal that does not 
contain iron or iron alloys). 
Use extra care to protect explosives. Never use 
hooks or other metal tools. Never drop, throw, or roll 
packages. Protect explosive packages from other 
cargo that might cause damage. 
Do not transfer a Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 from one 
vehicle to another on a public roadway except in an 
emergency. If safety requires an emergency 
transfer, set out red warning reflectors, flags, or 
electric lanterns. You must warn others on the road. 
Never transport damaged packages of explosives. 
Do not take a package that shows any dampness or 
oily stain. 
Do not transport Division 1.1 or 1.2 in vehicle 
combinations if: 
There is a marked or placarded cargo tank in the 
combination. 
The other vehicle in the combination contains: 
Division 1.1 A (Initiating Explosives). 
Packages of Class 7 (Radioactive) materials 
labeled "Yellow III." 
Division 2.3 (Poisonous Gas) Hazard zone A or B or 
Division 6.1 (Poisonous) materials Hazard zone A. 
Hazardous materials in a portable tank, on a DOT 
Spec 106A or 110A tank. 
Class 4 (Flammable Solids) and Class 5 
(Oxidizers) Materials. Class 4 materials are solids 
that react (including fire and explosion) to water, 
heat, and air or even react spontaneously. 
Class 4 and 5 materials must be completely 
enclosed in a vehicle or covered securely. Class 4 
and 5 materials, which become unstable and 
dangerous when wet, must be kept dry while in 
transit and during loading and unloading. Materials 
that are subject to spontaneous combustion or 
heating must be in vehicles with sufficient 
ventilation. 
Class 8 (Corrosive) Materials. If loading by hand, 
load breakable containers of corrosive liquid one by 
one. Keep them right side up. Do not drop or roll the 
containers. Load them onto an even floor surface. 
Stack carboys only if the lower tiers can bear the 
weight of the upper tiers safely. 
Do not load nitric acid above any other product. 
Load charged storage batteries so their liquid won't 
spill. Keep them right side up. Make sure other 
cargo won't fall against or short circuit them. 
Never load corrosive liquids next to or above: 
Division 1.4 (Explosives C). 
Division 4.1 (Flammable Solids). 
Division 4.3 (Dangerous When Wet). 
Class 5 (Oxidizers). 
Division 2.3, Zone B (Poisonous Gases). 
Never load corrosive liquids with: 
Division 1.1 or 1.2 
Division 1.3 
Division 1.5 (Blasting Agents). 
Division 2.3, Zone A (Poisonous Gases). 
Division 4.2 (Spontaneously Combustible 
Materials). 
Division 6.1, PGI, Zone A (Poison Liquids). 
Class 2 (Compressed Gases) Including 
Cryogenic Liquids. If your vehicle doesn't have 
racks to hold cylinders, the cargo space floor must 
be flat. The cylinders must be: 
Held upright. 
In racks attached to the vehicle or in boxes that will 
keep them from turning over. 
Cylinders may be loaded in a horizontal position 
(lying down) if it is designed so the relief valve is in 
the vapor space. 
Division 2.3 (Poisonous Gas) or Division 6.1 
(Poisonous) Materials. Never transport these 
materials in containers with interconnections. Never 
--- PAGE 119 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-12  
Version: July 2017 
load a package labeled POISON or POISON 
INHALATION HAZARD in the driver's cab or 
sleeper or with food material for human or animal 
consumption. There are special rules for loading 
and unloading Class 2 materials in cargo tanks. You 
must have special training to do this. 
Class 7 (Radioactive) Materials. Some packages 
of Class 7 (Radioactive) materials bear a number 
called the "transport index." The shipper labels 
these packages Radioactive II or Radioactive III, 
and prints  the package's transport index on the 
label. Radiation surrounds each package, passing 
through all nearby packages. To deal with this 
problem, the number of packages you can load 
together is controlled. Their closeness to people, 
animals, and unexposed film is also controlled. The 
transport index tells the degree of control needed 
during transportation. The total transport index of all 
packages in a single vehicle must not exceed 
50.Table A to this section (49 CFR 177-842) shows 
rules for each transport ind ex. It shows how close 
you can load Class 7 (Radioactive) materials to 
people, animals, or film. For example, you can't 
leave a package with a transport index of 1.1 within 
two feet of people or cargo space walls. 
 
 
Do Not Load Table 
Do Not Load In The Same Vehicle With 
Division 6.1 or 2.3 
(POISON or poison 
inhalation hazard 
labeled material). 
Animal or human food unless the 
poison package is over packed in 
an approved way. Foodstuffs are 
anything you swallow. However, 
mouthwash, toothpaste, and skin 
creams are not foodstuff.  
Division 2.3 
(Poisonous) gas Zone 
A or Division 6.1 
(Poison) liquids, PGI, 
Zone A. 
Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Explosives, 
Division 5.1 (Oxidizers), Class 3 
(Flammable Liquids), Class 8 
(Corrosive Liquids), Division 5.2 
(Organic Peroxides),  
Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Explosives,  
Division 1.5 (Blasting Agents),  
Division 2.1 (Flammable Gases), 
Class 4 (Flammable Solids). 
Charged storage 
batteries. Division 1.1. 
Class 1 (Detonating 
primers). 
Any other explosives unless in 
authorized containers or 
packages. 
Division 6.1 
(Cyanides or cyanide 
mixtures). 
Acids, corrosive materials, or other 
acidic materials which could 
release hydrocyanic acid. 
For Example:  
  Cyanides, Inorganic, n.o.s. 
  Silver Cyanide 
  Sodium Cyanide. 
Nitric acid (Class 8). 
Other materials unless the nitric 
acid is not loaded above any other 
material. 
Figure 9.9 
 
Mixed loads. The rules require some products to be 
loaded separately. You cannot load them together 
in the same cargo space. Figure 9.9 lists some 
examples. The r egulations (the Segregation Table 
for Hazardous Materials) name other materials you 
must keep apart. 
 
 
 
 
 
Subsection 9.4 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. Around which hazard classes must you 
never smoke? 
2. Which three hazard classes should not be 
loaded into a trailer th at has a heater/air 
conditioner unit? 
3. Should the floor liner required for Division 
1.1 or 1.2 materials be stainless steel? 
4. At the shipper’s dock you’re given a paper 
for 100 cartons of battery acid. You already 
have 100 pounds of dry Silver Cyanide on 
board. What precautions do you have to 
take? 
5. Name a hazard class that uses transport 
indexes to determine the amount that can 
be loaded in a single vehicle. 
 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsection 9.4. 
 
 
 
9.5 – Bulk Packaging Marking, Loading 
and Unloading 
The glossary at the end of this section gives the 
meaning of the word bulk. Cargo tanks are bulk 
packaging permanently attached to a vehicle. Cargo 
tanks remain on the vehicle when you load and 
unload them. Port able tanks are bulk packaging, 
which are not permanently attached to a vehicle. 
The product is loaded or unloaded while the 
portable tanks are off the vehicle. Portable tanks are 
then put on a vehicle for transportation. There are 
many types of cargo tanks  in use. The most 
common cargo tanks are MC306 for liquids and 
MC331 for gases. 
 
9.5.1 – Markings 
You must display the identification number of the 
hazardous materials in portable tanks and cargo 
tanks and other bulk packaging (such as dump 
trucks). Identification numbers are in column 4 of the 
Hazardous Materials Table. The rules require black 
100 mm (3.9 inch) numbers on orange panels, 
placards, or a white, diamond-shaped background if 
no placards are required. Specification cargo tanks 
must show re-test date markings. 
--- PAGE 120 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-13 
Version: July 2017 
Portable tanks must also show the lessee or 
owner's name. They must also display the shipping 
name of the contents on two opposing sides. The 
letters of the shipping name must be at least two 
inches tall on portable tanks with capacities of more 
than 1,000 gallons and one-inch tall on portable 
tanks with capacities of less than 1,000 gallons. The 
identification number must appear on each side and 
each end of a portable tank or other bulk packaging 
that hold 1,000 gallons or more and on two opposing 
sides, if the portable tank holds less than 1,000 
gallons. The identification numbers must still be 
visible when the portable tank is on the motor 
vehicle. If they are not visible, you must display the 
identification number on both sides and ends of the 
motor vehicle. 
Intermediate bulk containers (IBCs) are bulk 
packages, but are not required to have the owner’s 
name or shipping name. 
9.5.2 – Tank Loading 
The person in charge of loading and unloading a 
cargo tank must be sure a qualified person is always 
watching. This person watching the loading or 
unloading must: 
Be alert. 
Have a clear view of the cargo tank. 
Be within 25 feet of the tank. 
Know of the hazards of the materials involved. 
Know the procedures to follow in an emergency. 
Be authorized to move the cargo tank and able to 
do so. 
There are special attendance rules for cargo tanks 
transporting propane and anhydrous ammonia. 
Close all manholes and valves before moving a tank 
of hazardous materials, no matter how small the 
amount in the tank or how short the distance. 
Manholes and valves must be closed to prevent 
leaks. It is illegal to move a cargo tank with open 
valves or covers unless it is empty according to 49 
CFR 173.29. 
9.5.3 – Flammable Liquids 
Turn off your engine before loading or unloading 
any flammable liquids. Only run the engine if 
needed to operate a pump. Ground a cargo tank 
correctly before filling it through an open filling hole. 
Ground the tank before opening the filling hole, and 
maintain the ground until after closing the filling 
hole. 
9.5.4 – Compressed Gas 
Keep liquid discharge valves on a compressed gas 
tank closed except when loading and unloading. 
Unless your engine runs a pump for product 
transfer, turn it off when loading or unloading. If you 
use the engine, turn it off after product transfer, 
before you unhook the hose. Unhook all 
loading/unloading connections before coupling, 
uncoupling, or moving a cargo tank. Always chock 
trailers and semi-trailers to prevent motion when 
uncoupled from the power unit. 
Subsection 9.5 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. What are cargo tanks?
2. How is a portable tank different from a cargo
tank?
3. Your engine runs a pump used during delivery
of compressed gas. Should you turn off the
engine before or after unhooking hoses after
delivery?
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t
answer them all, re-read subsection 9.5. 
9.6 – Hazardous Materials -- Driving 
and Parking Rules 
9.6.1 – Parking with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 
Explosives  
Never park with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives 
within five feet of the traveled part of the road. 
Except for short periods of time needed for vehicle 
operation necessities (e.g., fueling), do not park 
within 300 feet of: 
A bridge, tunnel, or building. 
A place where people gather. 
An open fire. 
If you must park to do your job, do so only briefly. 
Don't park on private property unless the owner is 
aware of the danger. Someone must always watch 
the parked vehicle. You may let someone else 
watch it for you only if your vehicle is: 
On the shipper's property. 
On the carrier's property. 
On the consignee's property. 
--- PAGE 121 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-14 
Version: July 2017 
You are allowed to leave your vehicle unattended in 
a safe haven. A safe haven is an approved place for 
parking unattended vehicles loaded with explosives. 
Designation of authorized safe havens is usually 
made by local authorities. 
9.6.2 – Parking a Placarded Vehicle Not 
Transporting Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3) 
Explosives 
You may park a placarded vehicle (not laden with 
explosives) within five feet of the traveled part of the 
road only if your work requires it. Do so only briefly. 
Someone must always watch the vehicle when 
parked on a public roadway or shoulder. Do not 
uncouple a trailer and leave it with hazardous 
materials on a public street. Do not park within 300 
feet of an open fire. 
9.6.3 – Attending Parked Vehicles 
The person attending a placarded vehicle must: 
Be in the vehicle, awake, and not in the sleeper 
berth, or within 100 feet of the vehicle and have it 
within clear view. 
Be aware of the hazards of the materials being 
transported. 
Know what to do in emergencies. 
Be able to move the vehicle, if needed. 
9.6.4 – No Flares! 
You might break down and have to use stopped 
vehicle signals. Use reflective triangles or red 
electric lights. Never use burning signals, such as 
flares or fuses, around a: 
Tank used for Class 3 (Flammable Liquids) or 
Division 2.1 (Flammable Gas) whether loaded or 
empty. 
Vehicle loaded with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 
Explosives. 
9.6.5 – Route Restrictions 
Some states and counties require permits to 
transport hazardous materials or wastes. They may 
limit the routes you can use. Local rules about 
routes and permits change often. It is your job as 
driver to find out if you need permits or must use 
special routes. Make sure you have all needed 
papers before starting. 
If you work for a carrier, ask your dispatcher about 
route restrictions or permits. If you are an 
independent trucker and are planning a new route, 
check with state agencies where you plan to travel. 
Some localities prohibit transportation of hazardous 
materials through tunnels, over bridges, or other 
roadways. Always check before you start. 
Whenever placarded, avoid heavily populated 
areas, crowds, tunnels, narrow streets, and alleys. 
Take other routes, even if inconvenient, unless 
there is no other way. Never drive a placarded 
vehicle near open fires unless you can safely pass 
without stopping. 
If transporting Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives, 
you must have a written route plan and follow that 
plan. Carriers prepare the route plan in advance and 
give the driver a copy. You may plan the route 
yourself if you pick up the explosives at a location 
other than your employer's terminal. Write out the 
plan in advance. Keep a copy of it with you while 
transporting the explosives. Deliver shipments of 
explosives only to authorized persons or leave them 
in locked rooms designed for explosives storage. 
A carrier must choose the safest route to transport 
placarded radioactive materials. After choosing the 
route, the carrier must tell the driver about the 
radioactive materials, and show the route plan.  
9.6.6 – No Smoking 
Do not smoke within 25 feet of a placarded cargo 
tank used for Class 3 (flammable liquids) or Division 
2.1 (gases). Also, do not smoke or carry a lighted 
cigarette, cigar, or pipe within 25 feet of any vehicle, 
which contains: 
Class 1 (Explosives) 
Class 3 (Flammable Liquids) 
Class 4.1 (Flammable Solids) 
Class 4.2 (Spontaneously Combustible) 
Class 5 (Oxidizers) 
9.6.7 – Refuel with Engine Off 
Turn off your engine before fueling a motor vehicle 
containing hazardous materials. Someone must 
always be at the nozzle, controlling fuel flow. 
9.6.8 – 10 B C Fire Extinguisher 
The power unit of placarded vehicles must have a 
fire extinguisher with a UL rating of 10 B:C or more. 
9.6.9 – Check Tires  
Make sure your tires are properly inflated. 
You must examine each tire on a motor vehicle at 
the beginning of each trip and each time the 
vehicle is parked. 
--- PAGE 122 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-15 
Version: July 2017 
The only acceptable way to check tire pressure is to 
use a tire pressure gauge. 
Do not drive with a tire that is leaking or flat except 
to the nearest safe place to fix it. Remove any 
overheated tire. Place it a safe distance from your 
vehicle. Don't drive until you correct the cause of the 
overheating. Remember to follow the rules about 
parking and attending placarded vehicles. They 
apply even when checking, repairing, or replacing 
tires. 
9.6.10 – Where to Keep Shipping Papers and 
Emergency Response Information 
Do not accept a hazardous materials shipment 
without a properly prepared shipping paper. A 
shipping paper for hazardous materials must always 
be easily recognized. Other people must be able to 
find it quickly after a crash. 
Clearly distinguish hazardous materials shipping 
papers from others by tabbing them or keeping 
them on top of the stack of papers. 
When you are behind the wheel, keep shipping 
papers within your reach (with your seat belt on), 
or in a pouch on the driver's door. They must be 
easily seen by someone entering the cab. 
When not behind the wheel, leave shipping papers 
in the driver's door pouch or on the driver's seat. 
Emergency response information must be kept in 
the same location as the shipping paper. 
Papers for Division 1.1, 1.2 or, 1.3 Explosives. 
A carrier must give each driver transporting Division 
1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives a copy of Federal Motor 
Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR), Part 397. The 
carrier must also give written instructions on what to 
do if delayed or in an accident. The written 
instructions must include: 
The names and telephone numbers of people to 
contact (including carrier agents or shippers). 
The nature of the explosives transported. 
The precautions to take in emergencies such as 
fires, accidents, or leaks. 
Drivers must sign a receipt for these documents. 
You must be familiar with, and have in your 
possession while driving, the: 
Shipping papers. 
Written emergency instructions. 
Written route plan. 
A copy of FMCSR, Part 397. 
9.6.11 – Equipment for Chlorine 
A driver transporting chlorine in cargo tanks must 
have an approved gas mask in the vehicle. The 
driver must also have an emergency kit for 
controlling leaks in dome cover plate fittings on the 
cargo tank. 
9.6.12 – Stop before Railroad Crossings 
Stop before a railroad crossing if your vehicle: 
Is placarded. 
Carries any amount of chlorine. 
Has cargo tanks, whether loaded or empty used for 
hazardous materials. 
You must stop 15 to 50 feet before the nearest rail. 
Proceed only when you are sure no train is coming 
and you can clear the tracks without stopping. Don't 
shift gears while crossing the tracks. 
9.7 – Hazardous Materials -
Emergencies 
9.7.1 – Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG) 
The Department of Transportation has a guidebook 
for firefighters, police, and industry workers on how 
to protect themselves and the public from 
hazardous materials. The guide is indexed by 
proper shipping name and hazardous materials 
identification number. Emergency personnel look 
for these things on the shipping paper. That is why 
it is vital that the proper shipping name, identification 
number, label, and placards are correct. 
9.7.2 – Crashes/Incidents 
As a professional driver, your job at the scene of a 
crash or an incident is to: 
Keep people away from the scene. 
Limit the spread of material, only if you can safely 
do so. 
Communicate the danger of the hazardous 
materials to emergency response personnel. 
Provide emergency responders with the shipping 
papers and emergency response information. 
Follow this checklist: 
Check to see that your driving partner is OK. 
Keep shipping papers with you. 
Keep people far away and upwind. 
Warn others of the danger. 
Call for help. 
--- PAGE 123 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-16  
Version: July 2017 
Follow your employer's instructions. 
9.7.3 – Fires 
You might have to control minor truck fires on the 
road. However, unless you have the training and 
equipment to do so safely, don't fight hazardous 
materials fires. Dealing  with hazardous materials 
fires requires special training and protective gear. 
 
When you discover a fire, call for help. You may use 
the fire extinguisher to keep minor truck fires from 
spreading to cargo before firefighters arrive. Feel 
trailer doors to s ee if they are hot before opening 
them. If hot, you may have a cargo fire and should 
not open the doors. Opening doors lets air in and 
may make the fire flare up. Without air, many fires 
only smolder until firemen arrive, doing less 
damage. If your cargo is already on fire, it is not safe 
to fight the fire. Keep the shipping papers with you 
to give to emergency personnel as soon as they 
arrive. Warn other people of the danger and keep 
them away. 
 
If you discover a cargo leak, identify the hazardous 
materials leaking by using shipping papers, labels, 
or package location. Do not touch any leaking 
material--many people injure themselves by 
touching hazardous materials. Do not try to identify 
the material or find the source of a leak by smell. 
Toxic gases can de stroy your sense of smell and 
can injure or kill you even if they don't smell. Never 
eat, drink, or smoke around a leak or spill.  
 
If hazardous materials are spilling from your vehicle, 
do not move it any more than safety requires. You 
may move off the road and away from places where 
people gather, if doing so serves safety. Only move 
your vehicle if you can do so without danger to 
yourself or others. 
 
Never continue driving with hazardous materials 
leaking from your vehicle in order to find a phone , 
truck stop, help, or similar reason. Remember, the 
carrier pays for the cleanup of contaminated parking 
lots, roadways, and drainage ditches. The costs are 
enormous, so don't leave a lengthy trail of 
contamination. If hazardous materials are spilling 
from your vehicle: 
Park it. 
Secure the area. 
Stay there. 
Call for help or send someone else for help. 
When sending someone for help, give that person: 
A description of the emergency. 
Your exact location and direction of travel. 
Your name, the carrier's name, and the name of 
the community or city where your terminal is 
located. 
The proper shipping name, hazard class, and 
identification number of the hazardous materials, if 
you know them.  
 
This is a lot for someone to remember. It is a good 
idea to write it all down for the person you send for 
help. The emergency response team must know 
these things to find you and to handle the 
emergency. They may have to travel miles to get to 
you. This information will help them to bring the right 
equipment the first time, without having to go back 
for it. 
 
Never move your vehicle, if doing so will cause 
contamination or damage the vehicle. Keep upwind 
and away from roadside rests, truck stops, cafes, 
and businesses. Never try to repack leaking 
containers. Unless you have the traini ng and 
equipment to repair leaks safely, don't try it. Call 
your dispatcher or supervisor for instructions and, if 
needed, emergency personnel. 
 
9.7.4 – Responses to Specific Hazards 
 
Class 1 (Explosives).  If your vehicle has a 
breakdown or accident while carrying explosives, 
warn others of the danger. Keep bystanders away. 
Do not allow smoking or open fire near the vehicle. 
If there is a fire, warn every  one of the danger of 
explosion. 
 
Remove all explosives before separating vehicles 
involved in a collision. Place the explosives at least 
200 feet from the vehicles and occupied buildings. 
Stay a safe distance away. 
 
Class 2 (Compressed Gases). If compressed gas 
is leaking from your vehicle, warn others of the 
danger. Only permit those involved in removing t he 
hazard or wreckage to get close. You must notify 
the shipper if compressed gas is involved in any 
accident. 
 
Unless you are fueling machinery used in road 
construction or maintenance, do not transfer a 
flammable compressed gas from one tank to 
another on any public roadway. 
 
Class 3 (Flammable Liquids).  If you are 
transporting a flammable liquid and have an 
accident or your vehicle breaks down, prevent 
bystanders from gathering. Warn people of the 
danger. Keep them from smoking. 
Never transport a leaking  cargo tank farther than 
needed to reach a safe place. Get off the roadway 
if you can do so safely. Don't transfer flammable 
--- PAGE 124 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-17 
Version: July 2017 
liquid from one vehicle to another on a public 
roadway except in an emergency. 
Class 4 (Flammable Solids) and Class 5 
(Oxidizing Materials).  If a flammable solid or 
oxidizing material spills, warn others of the fire 
hazard. Do not open smoldering packages of 
flammable solids. Remove them from the vehicle if 
you can safely do so. Also, remove unbroken 
packages if it will decrease the fire hazard. 
Class 6 (Poisonous Materials and Infectious 
Substances). It is your job to protect yourself, other 
people, and property from harm. Remember that 
many products classed as poison are also 
flammable. If you think a Division 2.3 (Poison 
Gases) or Division 6.1 (Poison Materials) might be 
flammable, take the added precautions needed for 
flammable liquids or gases. Do not allow smoking, 
open flame, or welding. Warn others of the hazards 
of fire, of inhaling vapors, or coming in contact with 
the poison. 
A vehicle involved in a leak of Division 2.3 (Poison 
Gases) or Division 6.1 (Poisons) must be checked 
for stray poison before being used again.  
If a Division 6.2 (Infectious Substances) package is 
damaged in handling or transportation, you should 
immediately contact your supervisor. Packages that 
appear to be damaged or show signs of leakage 
should not be accepted. 
Class 7 (Radioactive Materials).  If radioactive 
material is involved in a leak or broken package, tell 
your dispatcher or supervisor as soon as possible. 
If there is a spill, or if an internal container might be 
damaged, do not touch or inhale the material. Do 
not use the vehicle until it is cleaned and checked 
with a survey meter. 
Class 8 (Corrosive Materials). If corrosives spill or 
leak during transportation, be careful to avoid 
further damage or injury when handling the 
containers. Parts of the vehicle exposed to a 
corrosive liquid must be thoroughly washed with 
water. After unloading, wash out the interior as soon 
as possible before reloading. 
If continuing to transport a leaking tank would be 
unsafe, get off the road. If safe to do so, contain any 
liquid leaking from the vehicle. Keep bystanders 
away from the liquid and its fumes. Do everything 
possible to prevent injury to yourself and to others. 
9.7.5 – Required Notification 
The National Response Center helps coordinate 
emergency response to chemical hazards. It is a 
resource to the police and firefighters. It maintains a 
24-hour toll-free line listed below. You or your 
employer must phone when any of the following 
occur as a direct result of a hazardous materials 
incident: 
A person is killed. 
An injured person requires hospitalization. 
Estimated property damage exceeds $50,000. 
The general public is evacuated for more than one 
hour. 
One or more major transportation arteries or 
facilities are closed for one hour or more. 
Fire, breakage, spillage, or suspected radioactive 
contamination occurs. 
Fire, breakage, spillage or suspected 
contamination occur involving shipment of 
infectious substance(s) (bacteria or toxins). 
The release of a marine pollutant in a quantity 
greater than 119 gallons for a liquid or 882 pounds 
for a solid; or a situation exists of such a nature 
(e.g., continuing danger to life exists at the scene 
of an incident) that, in the judgment of the carrier, 
should be reported. 
National Response Center 
(800) 424-8802 
Persons telephoning the National Response Center 
should be ready to give: 
Their name. 
Name and address of the carrier they work for. 
Phone number where they can be reached. 
Date, time, and location of incident. 
The extent of injuries, if any. 
Classification, name, and quantity of hazardous 
materials involved, if such information is available. 
Type of incident and nature of hazardous materials 
involvement and whether a continuing danger to 
life exists at the scene. 
If a reportable quantity of hazardous substance was 
involved, the caller should give the name of the 
shipper and the quantity of the hazardous 
substance discharged. 
Be prepared to give your employer the required 
information as well. Carriers must make detailed 
written reports within 30 days of an incident. 
--- PAGE 125 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-18  
Version: July 2017 
CHEMTREC 
(800) 424-9300 
The Chemical Transportation Emergency Center 
(CHEMTREC) in Washington also has a 24 -hour 
toll-free line. CHEMTREC was creat ed to provide 
emergency personnel with technical information 
about the physical properties of hazardous 
materials. The National Response Center and 
CHEMTREC are in close communication. If you call 
either one, they will tell the other about the problem 
when appropriate. 
Do not leave radioactive yellow - II or yellow - III 
labeled packages near people, animals, or film 
longer than shown in Figure 9.10 
 
Figure 9.10 
 
 
Classes of Hazardous Materials 
Hazardous materials are categorized into nine 
major hazard classes and additional categories for 
consumer commodities and combustible liquids. 
The classes of h azardous materials are listed in 
Figure 9.11. 
 
Hazard Class Definitions 
Table B 
Class Class Name Example 
1 Explosives 
Ammunition, 
Dynamite, 
Fireworks 
2 Gases Propane, 
Oxygen, Helium 
3 Flammable  Gasoline, 
Acetone 
4 Flammable 
Solids Matches, Fuses 
5 Oxidizers 
Ammonium 
Nitrate, Hydrogen 
Peroxide 
6 Poisons Pesticides, 
Arsenic 
7 Radioactive Uranium, 
Plutonium 
8 Corrosives 
Hydrochloric 
Acid, Battery 
Fluid 
9 
Miscellaneous 
Hazardous 
Materials 
Formaldehyde, 
Asbestos 
None 
ORM-D (Other 
Regulated 
Material-
Domestic) 
Hair Spray or 
Charcoal 
None Combustible 
Liquids 
Fuel Oils, Lighter 
Fluid 
Figure 9.11 
 
 
Subsections 9.6 and 9.7 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. If your placarded trailer has dual tires, how 
often should you check the tires? 
2. What is a safe haven? 
3. How close to the traveled part of the roadway 
can you park with Division 1.2 or 1.3 
materials? 
4. How close can you park to a bridge, tunnel, or 
building with the same load? 
5. What type of fire extinguisher must placarded 
vehicles carry? 
6. You’re hauling 100 pounds of Di vision 4.3 
(dangerous when wet) materials. Do you 
need to stop before a railroad -highway 
crossing? 
7. At a rest area you discover your hazardous 
materials shipments slowly leaking from the 
vehicle. There is no phone around. What 
should you do? 
Radioactive Separation  
Table A 
TOTAL TRANSPORT 
INDEX 
MINIMUM DISTANCE IN FEET TO 
NEAREST UNDEVELOPED FILM 
TO PEOPLE OR CARGO 
COMPARTMENT 
PARTITIONS 
0-2 
Hrs. 
2-4 
Hrs. 
4-8 
Hrs. 
8-12 
Hrs. 
Over 12 
Hrs. 
None 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0.1 to 
1.0 1 2 3 4 5 1 
1.1 to 
5.0 3 4 6 8 11 2 
5.1 to 
10.0 4 6 9 11 15 3 
10.1 to 
20.0 5 8 12 16 22 4 
20.1 to 
30.0 7 10 15 20 29 5 
30.1 to 
40.0 8 11 17 22 33 6 
40.1 to 
50.0 9 12 19 24 36  
--- PAGE 126 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-19 
Version: July 2017 
8. What is the Emergency Response Guide
(ERG)?
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 9.6 and 9.7. 
9.8 – Hazardous Materials Glossary 
This glossary presents definitions of certain terms 
used in this section. A complete glossary of terms 
can be found in the federal Hazardous Materials 
Rules (49 CFR 171.8). You should have an up- to-
date copy of these rules for your reference. 
(Note: You will not be tested on this glossary.) 
Sec. 171.8 Definitions and abbreviations. 
Bulk packaging – Packaging, other than a vessel, 
or a barge, including a transport vehicle or freight 
container, in which hazardous materials are loaded 
with no intermediate form of containment and which 
has: 
A maximum capacity greater than 450 L (119 
gallons) as a receptacle for a liquid; 
A maximum net mass greater than 400 kg (882 
pounds) or a maximum capacity greater than 450 L 
(119 gallons) as a receptacle for a solid; or 
A water capacity greater than 454 kg (1000 pounds) 
as a receptacle for a gas as defined in Sec. 173.115. 
Cargo tank - A bulk packaging which: 
Is a tank intended primarily for the carriage of liquids 
or gases and includes appurtenances, 
reinforcements, fittings, and closures (for "tank", 
see 49 CFR 178.345-1(c), 178.337-1, or 178.338-1, 
as applicable); 
Is permanently attached to or forms a part of a motor 
vehicle, or is not permanently attached to a motor 
vehicle but which, by reason of its size, construction, 
or attachment to a motor vehicle is loaded or 
unloaded without being removed from the motor 
vehicle; and 
Is not fabricated under a specification for cylinders, 
portable tanks, tank cars, or multi-unit tank car 
tanks. 
Carrier – A person who transports passengers or 
property in commerce by rail car, aircraft, motor 
vehicle or vessel. 
Consignee – The business or person to whom a 
shipment is delivered. 
Division – A subdivision of a hazard class. 
EPA – U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
FMCSR – The Federal Motor Carrier Safety 
Regulations. 
Freight container – a reusable container having a 
volume of 64 cubic feet or more, designed and 
constructed to permit being lifted with its contents 
intact and intended primarily for containment of 
packages (in unit form) during transportation. 
Fuel tank – A tank, other than a cargo tank, used to 
transport flammable or combustible liquid or 
compressed gas for the purpose of supplying fuel 
for propulsion of the transport vehicle to which it is 
attached, or for the operation of other equipment on 
the transport vehicle. 
Gross weight or gross mass  – The weight of the 
packaging plus the weight of its contents. 
Hazard class – The category of hazard assigned to 
a hazardous material under the definitional criteria 
of Part 173 and the provisions of the Sec. 172.101 
Table. A material may meet the defining criteria for 
more than one hazard class but is assigned to only 
one hazard class. 
Hazardous materials  – A substance or material 
which has been determined by the Secretary of 
Transportation to be capable of posing an 
unreasonable risk to health, safety, and property 
when transported in commerce, and which has 
been so designated. The term includes hazardous 
substances, hazardous wastes, marine pollutants, 
elevated temperature materials and materials 
designated as hazardous in the hazardous 
materials table of §172.101, and materials that meet 
the defining criteria for hazard classes and divisions 
in §173, subchapter c of this chapter. 
Hazardous substance  - A material, including its 
mixtures and solutions, that: 
Is listed in Appendix A to Sec. 172.101; 
Is in a quantity, in one package, which equals or 
exceeds the reportable quantity (RQ) listed in 
Appendix A to Sec. 172.101; and 
When in a mixture or solution - 
For radionuclides, conforms to paragraph 7 of 
Appendix A to Sec. 172.101. 
For other than radionuclides, is in a concentration 
by weight which equals or exceeds the 
concentration corresponding to the RQ of the 
material, as shown in Figure 9.12. 
--- PAGE 127 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-20  
Version: July 2017 
Hazardous Substance Concentrations 
RQ Pounds 
(Kilograms 
Concentration by Weight 
Percent PPM 
5,000 
(2,270) 
10 100,000 
1,000 (454) 2 20,000 
100 (45.4) .2 2,000 
10 (4.54) .02 200 
1 (0.454) .002 20 
Figure 9.12 
 
This definition does not apply to petroleum products 
that are lubricants or fuels (see 40 CFR 300.6). 
 
Hazardous waste – Any material that is subject to 
the Hazardous Waste Manifest Requirements of the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency specified in 
40 CFR Part 262. 
 
Intermediate bulk container (IBC)  – A rigid or 
flexible portable packaging, other than a cylinder or 
portable tank, which is designed for mechani cal 
handling. Standards for IBCs manufactured in the 
United States are set forth in subparts N and O Part 
178. 
 
Limited quantity  – The maximum amount of a 
hazardous material for which there may be specific 
labeling or packaging exception. 
 
Marking – The de scriptive name, identification 
number, instructions, cautions, weight, 
specification, or UN marks or combinations thereof, 
required by this subchapter on outer packaging of 
hazardous materials. 
 
Mixture – A material composed of more than one 
chemical compound or element. 
 
Name of contents – The proper shipping name as 
specified in Sec. 172.101. 
 
Non-bulk packaging - A packaging, which has: 
A maximum capacity of 450 L (119 gallons) as a 
receptacle for a liquid; 
A maximum net mass less than 400 kg (882 
pounds) and a maximum capacity of 450 L (119 
gallons) or less as a receptacle for a solid;  
A water capacity greater than 454 kg (1,000 
pounds) or less as a receptacle for a gas as defined 
in Sec. 173.115;  
Regardless of the definition of bulk packaging, a 
mazimum net mass of 400 kg (882 pounds) or less 
for a bag or box conforming to the applicable 
requirements for specification packagings, including 
the maximum net mass limitations, provided in 
subpart L of Part 178. 
 
N.O.S. - Not otherwise specified.  
 
Outage o r ullage  – The amount by which a 
packaging falls short of being liquid full, usually 
expressed in percent by volume. 
 
Portable tank – Bulk packaging (except a cylinder 
having a water capacity of 1,000 pounds or less) 
designed primarily to be loaded onto, o r on, or 
temporarily attached to a transport vehicle or ship 
and equipped with skids, mountings, or accessories 
to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical 
means. It does not include a cargo tank, tank car, 
multi-unit tank car tank, or trailer carryin g 3AX, 
3AAX, or 3T cylinders. 
 
Proper shipping name  – The name of the 
hazardous materials shown in Roman print (not 
italics) in Sec. 172.101. 
 
P.s.i. or psi – Pounds per square inch. 
 
P.s.i.a. or psia – Pounds per square inch absolute. 
 
Reportable quantity (RQ) - The quantity specified 
in Column 2 of the Appendix to Sec. 172.101 for any 
material identified in Column 1 of the Appendix. 
 
PHMSA – The Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration, U.S. Department of 
Transportation, Washington, DC 20590. 
 
Shipper's certification – A statement on a shipping 
paper, signed by the shipper, saying he/she 
prepared the shipment properly according to law.  
For example: 
"This is to certify that the above named materials 
are properly classified, described, package d, 
marked and labeled, and are in proper condition for 
transportation according to the applicable 
regulations or the Department of Transportation." ; 
or  
I hereby declare that the contents of this 
consignment are fully and accurately described 
above by the proper shipping name and are 
classified, packaged, marked and 
labeled/placarded, and are in all respects in proper 
condition for transport according to applicable 
international and national government regulations." 
 
Shipping paper – A shipping order, bill of lading, 
manifest, or other shipping document serving a 
similar purpose prepared in accordance with 
subpart C of Part 172. 
 
--- PAGE 128 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-21 
Version: July 2017 
Technical name – A recognized chemical name or 
microbiological name currently used in scientific and 
technical handbooks, journals, and texts. 
Transport vehicle – A cargo-carrying vehicle such 
as an automobile, van, tractor, truck, semi-trailer, 
tank car, or rail car used for the transportation of 
cargo by any mode. Each cargo-carrying body 
(trailer, rail car, etc.) is a separate transport vehicle. 
UN standard packaging  – A specification 
packaging conforming to the standards in the UN 
recommendations. 
UN – United Nations. 
--- PAGE 129 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
