Section 10 – School Buses Page 10-1 
Version: July 2017 
Section 10  
SCHOOL BUSES 
This Section Covers 
 Danger Zones and Use of Mirrors
 Loading and Unloading
 Emergency Exit and Evacuation
 Railroad-highway Grade Crossings
 Student Management
 Antilock Braking Systems
 Special Safety Considerations
Because state and local laws and regulations 
regulate so much of school transportation and 
school bus operations, many of the procedures in 
this section may differ from state to state. You 
should be thoroughly familiar with the laws and 
regulations in your state and local school district. 
10.1 – Danger Zones and Use of Mirrors 
10.1.1 – Danger Zones 
The danger zone is the area on all sides of the bus 
where children are in the most danger of being hit, 
either by another vehicle or their own bus. The 
danger zones may extend as much as 30 feet from 
the front bumper with the first 10 feet being the most 
dangerous, 10 feet from the left and right sides of 
the bus and 10 feet behind the rear bumper of the 
school bus. In addition, the area to the left of the bus 
is always considered dangerous because of 
passing cars. Figure 10.1 illustrates these danger 
zones. 
10.1.2 – Correct Mirror Adjustment 
Proper adjustment and use of all mirrors is vital to 
the safe operation of the school bus in order to 
observe the danger zone around the bus and look 
for students, traffic, and other objects in this area. 
You should always check each mirror before 
operating the school bus to obtain maximum 
viewing area. If necessary, have the mirrors 
adjusted. 
Figure 10.1 
10.1.3 – Outside Left and Right Side Flat 
Mirrors 
These mirrors are mounted at the left and right front 
corners of the bus at the side or front of the 
windshield. They are used to monitor traffic, check 
clearances and students on the sides and to the rear 
of the bus. There is a blind spot immediately below 
and in front of each mirror and directly in back of the 
rear bumper. The blind spot behind the bus extends 
5o to 150 feet and could extend up to 400 feet 
depending on the length and width of the bus. 
Ensure that the mirrors are properly adjusted so you 
can see: 
200 feet or 4 bus lengths behind the bus. 
Along the sides of the bus. 
The rear tires touching the ground. 
Figure 10.2 shows how both the outside left and 
right side flat mirrors should be adjusted. 

--- PAGE 130 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 10 – School Buses Page 10-2 
Version: July 2017 
Figure 10.2 
10.1.4 – Outside Left and Right Side Convex 
Mirrors 
The convex mirrors are located below the outside 
flat mirrors. They are used to monitor the left and 
right sides at a wide angle. They provide a view of 
traffic, clearances, and students at the side of the 
bus. These mirrors present a view of people and 
objects that does not accurately reflect their size 
and distance from the bus. 
You should position these mirrors to see: 
The entire side of the bus up to the mirror mounts. 
Front of the rear tires touching the ground. 
At least one traffic lane on either side of the bus. 
Figure 10.3 shows how both the outside left and 
right side convex mirrors should be adjusted. 
10.1.5 – Outside Left and Right Side Crossover 
Mirrors 
These mirrors are mounted on both left and right 
front corners of the bus. They are used to see the 
front bumper “danger zone” area directly in front of 
the bus that is not visible by direct vision, and to 
view the “danger zone” area to the left side and the  
Figure 10.3 
right side of the bus, including the service door and 
front wheel area. The mirror presents a view of 
people and objects that does not accurately reflect 
their size and distance from the bus. The driver must 
ensure that these mirrors are properly adjusted. 
Ensure that the mirrors are properly adjusted so you 
can see: 
The entire area in front of the bus from the front 
bumper at ground level to a point where direct 
vision is possible. Direct vision and mirror view 
vision should overlap. 
The right and left front tires touching the ground. 
The area from the front of the bus to the service 
door. 
These mirrors, along with the convex and flat 
mirrors, should be viewed in a logical sequence to 
ensure that a child or object is not in any of the 
danger zones. 
Figure 10.4 illustrates how the left and right side 
crossover mirrors should be adjusted. 

--- PAGE 131 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 10 – School Buses Page 10-3 
Version: July 2017 
 
Figure 10.4 
 
10.1.6 – Overhead Inside Rearview Mirror 
 
This mirror is mounted directly above the windshield 
on the driver’s side area of the bus. This mirror is 
used to monitor passenger activity inside the bus. It 
may provide limit ed visibility directly in back of the 
bus if the bus is equipped with a glass -bottomed 
rear emergency door. There is a blind spot area 
directly behind the driver’s seat as well as a large 
blind spot area that begins at the rear bumper and 
could extend up to 400 feet or more behind the bus. 
You must use the exterior side mirrors to monitor 
traffic that approaches and enters this area. 
 
You should position the mirror to see: 
The top of the rear window in the top of the mirror. 
All of the students, including the heads of the 
students right behind you. 
 
10.2 – Loading and Unloading 
More students are killed while getting on or off a 
school bus each year than are killed as passengers 
inside of a school bus. As a result, knowing what to 
do before, during, and after  loading or unloading 
students is critical. This section will give you specific 
procedures to help you avoid unsafe conditions 
which could result in injuries and fatalities during 
and after loading and unloading students. 
 
The information in this section is intended to provide 
a broad overview, but is not a definitive set of 
actions. It is imperative that you learn and obey the 
state laws and regulations governing 
loading/unloading operations in your state. 
10.2.1 – Approaching the Stop 
 
Each school distri ct establishes official routes and 
official school bus stops. All stops should be 
approved by the school district prior to making the 
stop. You should never change the location of a bus 
stop without written approval from the appropriate 
school district official. 
 
You must use extreme caution when approaching a 
school bus stop. You are in a very demanding 
situation when entering these areas. It is critical that 
you understand and follow all state and local laws 
and regulations regarding approaching a school bus 
stop. This would involve the proper use of mirrors, 
alternating flashing lights, and when equipped, the 
moveable stop signal arm and crossing control arm. 
 
When approaching the stop, you should: 
Approach cautiously at a slow rate of speed. 
Look for pedestrians, traffic, or other objects 
before, during, and after coming to a stop. 
Continuously check all mirrors. 
If the school bus is so equipped, activate 
alternating flashing amber warning lights at least 
200 feet or approximately 5-10 seconds before the 
school bus stop or in accordance with state law. 
Turn on right turn signal indicator about 100-300 
feet or approximately 3-5 seconds before pulling 
over. 
Continuously check mirrors to monitor the danger 
zones for students, traffic, and other objects. 
Move as far as possible to the right on the traveled 
portion of the roadway. 
When stopping you should: 
Bring school bus to a full stop with the front 
bumper at least 10 feet away from students at the 
designated stop. This forces the students to walk 
to the bus so you have a better view of their 
movements. 
Place transmission in Park, or if there is no Park 
shift point, in Neutral and set the parking brake at 
each stop. 
Activate alternating red lights when traffic is a safe 
distance from the school bus and ensure stop arm 
is extended. 
Make a final check to see that all traffic has 
stopped before completely opening the door and 
signaling students to approach. 

--- PAGE 132 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 10 – School Buses Page 10-4 
Version: July 2017 
10.2.2 – Loading Procedures 
Perform a safe stop as described in subsection 
10.2.1. 
Students should wait in a designated location for 
the school bus, facing the bus as it approaches. 
Students should board the bus only when signaled 
by the driver. 
Monitor all mirrors continuously. 
Count the number of students at the bus stop and 
be sure all board the bus. If possible, know names 
of students at each stop. If there is a student 
missing, ask the other students where the student 
is. 
Have the students board the school bus slowly, in 
single file, and use the handrail. The dome light 
should be on while loading in the dark. 
Wait until students are seated and facing forward 
before moving the bus. 
Check all mirrors. Make certain no one is running 
to catch the bus. 
If you cannot account for a student outside, secure 
the bus, take the key, and check around and 
underneath the bus. 
When all students are accounted for, prepare to 
leave by: 
Closing the door. 
Engaging the transmission. 
Releasing the parking brake. 
Turning off alternating flashing red lights. 
Turning on left turn signal. 
Checking all mirrors again. 
Allowing congested traffic to disperse. 
When it is safe, move the bus to enter traffic flow 
and continue the route. 
The loading procedure is essentially the same 
wherever you load students, but there are slight 
differences. When students are loading at the 
school campus, you should: 
Turn off the ignition switch. 
Remove key if leaving driver’s compartment.
Position yourself to supervise loading as required 
or recommended by your state or local regulations. 
10.2.3 – Unloading Procedures on the Route 
Perform a safe stop at designated unloading areas 
as described in subsection 10.2.1.  
Have the students remain seated until told to exit. 
Check all mirrors. 
Count the number of students while unloading to 
confirm the location of all students before pulling 
away from the stop. 
Tell students to exit the bus and walk at least 10 
feet away from the side of the bus to a position 
where the driver can plainly see all students. 
Check all mirrors again. Make sure no students are 
around or returning to the bus. 
If you cannot account for a student outside the 
bus, secure the bus, and check around and 
underneath the bus. 
When all students are accounted for, prepare to 
leave by: 
Closing the door. 
Engaging transmission. 
Releasing parking brake. 
Turning off alternating flashing red lights. 
Turning on left turn signal. 
Checking all mirrors again. 
Allowing congested traffic to disperse. 
When it is safe, move the bus, enter the traffic flow 
and continue the route. 
Note. If you have missed a student’s unloading stop, 
do not back up. Be sure to follow local procedures. 
Additional Procedures for Students That Must 
Cross the Roadway. You should understand what 
students should do when exiting a school bus and 
crossing the street in front of the bus. In addition, 
the school bus driver should understand that 
students might not always do what they are 
supposed to do. If a student or students must cross 
the roadway, they should follow these procedures: 
Walk approximately 10 feet away from the side of 
the school bus to a position where you can see 
them. 
Walk to a location at least 10 feet in front of the 
right corner of the bumper, but still remaining away 
from the front of the school bus. 
--- PAGE 133 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 10 – School Buses Page 10-5 
Version: July 2017 
Stop at the right edge of the roadway. You should 
be able to see the student’s feet. 
When students reach the edge of the roadway, they 
should: 
Stop and look in all directions, making sure the 
roadway is clear and is safe. 
Check to see if the red flashing lights on the bus 
are still flashing. 
Wait for your signal before crossing the roadway. 
Upon your signal, the students should: 
Cross far enough in front of the school bus to be in 
your view. 
Stop at the left edge of the school bus, stop, and 
look again for your signal to continue to cross the 
roadway. 
Look for traffic in both directions, making sure 
roadway is clear. 
Proceed across the roadway, continuing to look in 
all directions. 
Note:  The school bus driver should enforce any 
state or local regulations or recommendations 
concerning student actions outside the school bus. 
10.2.4 – Unloading Procedures at School 
State and local laws and regulations regarding 
unloading students at schools, particularly in 
situations where such activities take place in the 
school parking lot or other location that is off the 
traveled roadway, are often different than unloading 
along the school bus route. It is important that the 
school bus driver understands and obeys state and 
local laws and regulations. The following 
procedures are meant to be general guidelines. 
When unloading at the school you should follow 
these procedures: 
Perform a safe stop at designated unloading areas 
as described in subsection 10.2.1.  
Secure the bus by: 
Turning off the ignition switch. 
Removing key if leaving driver’s compartment. 
Have the students remain seated until told to exit. 
Position yourself to supervise unloading as 
required or recommended by your state or local 
regulations. 
Have students exit in orderly fashion. 
Observe students as they step from bus to see that 
all move promptly away from the unloading area. 
Walk through the bus and check for 
hiding/sleeping students and items left by students. 
Check all mirrors. Make certain no students are 
returning to the bus. 
If you cannot account for a student outside the bus 
and the bus is secure, check around and 
underneath the bus. 
When all students are accounted for, prepare to 
leave by:  
Closing the door. 
Fastening safety belt. 
Starting engine. 
Engaging the transmission. 
Releasing the parking brake. 
Turning off alternating flashing red lights. 
Turning on left turn signal. 
Checking all mirrors again. 
Allowing congested traffic to disperse. 
When it is safe, pull away from the unloading area. 
10.2.5 – Special Dangers of Loading and 
Unloading 
Dropped or Forgotten Objects. Always focus on 
students as they approach the bus and watch for 
any who disappear from sight. 
Students may drop an object near the bus during 
loading and unloading. Stopping to pick up the 
object, or returning to pick up the object may cause 
the student to disappear from the driver’s sight at a 
very dangerous moment.  
Students should be told to leave any dropped object 
and move to a point of safety out of the danger 
zones and attempt to get the driver’s attention to 
retrieve the object. 
Handrail Hang-ups. Students have been injured or 
killed when clothing, accessories, or even parts of 
their body get caught in the handrail or door as they 
exited the bus. You should closely observe all 
students exiting the bus to confirm that they are in a 
safe location prior to moving the bus. 
--- PAGE 134 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 10 – School Buses Page 10-6 
Version: July 2017 
10.2.6 – Post-trip Inspection 
When your route or school activity trip is finished, 
you should conduct a post-trip inspection of the bus. 
You should walk through the bus and around the 
bus looking for the following: 
Articles left on the bus. 
Sleeping students. 
Open windows and doors. 
Mechanical/operational problems with the bus, with 
special attention to items that are unique to school 
buses – mirror systems, flashing warning lamps 
and stop signal arms. 
Damage or vandalism. 
Any problems or special situations should be 
reported immediately to your supervisor or school 
authorities. 
10.3 – Emergency Exit and Evacuation 
An emergency situation can happen to anyone, 
anytime, anywhere. It could be a crash, a stalled 
school bus on a railroad-highway crossing or in a 
high-speed intersection, an electrical fire in the 
engine compartment, a medical emergency to a 
student on the school bus, etc. Knowing what to do 
in an emergency –before, during and after an 
evacuation–can mean the difference between life 
and death.  
10.3.1 – Planning for Emergencies 
Determine Need to Evacuate Bus. The first and 
most important consideration is for you to recognize 
the hazard. If time permits, school bus drivers 
should contact their dispatcher to explain the 
situation before making a decision to evacuate the 
school bus. 
As a general rule, student safety and control is best 
maintained by keeping students on the bus during 
an emergency and/or impending crisis situation, if 
so doing does not expose them to unnecessary risk 
or injury. Remember, the decision to evacuate the 
bus must be a timely one. 
A decision to evacuate should include consideration 
of the following conditions: 
Is there a fire or danger of fire? 
Is there a smell of raw or leaking fuel? 
Is there a chance the bus could be hit by other 
vehicles? 
Is the bus in the path of a sighted tornado or rising 
waters? 
Are there downed power lines? 
Would removing students expose them to 
speeding traffic, severe weather, or a dangerous 
environment such as downed power lines? 
Would moving students complicate injuries such as 
neck and back injuries and fractures? 
Is there a hazardous spill involved? Sometimes, it 
may be safer to remain on the bus and not come in 
contact with the material. 
Mandatory Evacuations. The driver must 
evacuate the bus when: 
The bus is on fire or there is a threat of a fire. 
The bus is stalled on or adjacent to a railroad-
highway crossing. 
The position of the bus may change and increase 
the danger. 
There is an imminent danger of collision. 
There is a need to quickly evacuate because of a 
hazardous materials spill. 
10.3.2 – Evacuation Procedures 
Be Prepared and Plan Ahead.  When possible, 
assign two responsible, older student assistants to 
each emergency exit. Teach them how to assist the 
other students off the bus. Assign another student 
assistant to lead the students to a “safe place” after 
evacuation. However, you must recognize that there 
may not be older, responsible students on the bus 
at the time of the emergency. Therefore, emergency 
evacuation procedures must be explained to all 
students. This includes knowing how to operate the 
various emergency exits and the importance of 
listening to and following all instructions given by 
you. 
Some tips to determine a safe place: 
A safe place will be at least 100 feet off the road in 
the direction of oncoming traffic. This will keep the 
students from being hit by debris if another vehicle 
collides with the bus. 
Lead students upwind of the bus if fire is present. 
Lead students as far away from railroad tracks as 
possible and in the direction of any oncoming train. 
Lead students upwind of the bus at least 300 feet if 
there is a risk from spilled hazardous materials. 
--- PAGE 135 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 10 – School Buses Page 10-7 
Version: July 2017 
If the bus is in the direct path of a sighted tornado 
and evacuation is ordered, escort students to a 
nearby ditch or culvert if shelter in a building is not 
readily available, and direct them to lie face down, 
hands covering their head. They should be far 
enough away so the bus cannot topple on them.  
Avoid areas that are subject to flash floods. 
 
General Procedures. Determine if evacuation is in 
the best interest of safety.  
Determine the best type of evacuation: 
Front, rear or side door evacuation, or some 
combination of doors. 
Roof or window evacuation. 
Secure the bus by: 
Placing transmission in Park, or if there is no shift 
point, in Neutral. 
Setting parking brakes. 
Shutting off the engine. 
Removing ignition key. 
Activating hazard-warning lights. 
If time allows, notify dispatch office of evacuation 
location, conditions, and type of assistance 
needed. 
Dangle radio microphone or telephone out of 
driver’s window for later use, if operable. 
If no radio, or radio is inoperable, dispatch a 
passing motorist or area resident to call for help. 
As a last resort, dispatch two older, responsible 
students to go for help. 
Order the evacuation. 
Evacuate students from the bus. 
Do not move a student yo u believe may have 
suffered a neck or spinal injury unless his or her life 
is in immediate danger. 
Special procedures must be used to move neck 
spinal injury victims to prevent further injury. 
Direct a student assistant to lead students to the 
nearest safe place. 
Walk through the bus to ensure no students remain 
on the bus. Retrieve emergency equipment. 
Join waiting students. Account for all students and 
check for their safety. 
Protect the scene. Set out emergency warning 
devices as necessary and appropriate. 
Prepare information for emergency responders. 
 
10.4 – Railroad-highway Crossings 
 
10.4.1 – Types of Crossings 
Passive Crossings. This type of crossing does not 
have any type of traffic control device. You must 
stop at these crossings and follow proper 
procedures. However, the decision to proceed rests 
entirely in your hands. Passive crossings require 
you to recognize the crossing, search for any train 
using the tracks and decide if there is sufficient clear 
space to cross safely. Passive crossings have 
yellow circular advance warning signs, pavement 
markings and cross -bucks to assist you in 
recognizing a crossing. 
 
Active Crossings. This type of crossing has a 
traffic control device installed at the crossing to 
regulate traffic at the crossing. These active devices 
include flashing red lights, with or without bells and 
flashing red lights with bells and gates. 
 
10.4.2 – Warning Signs and Devices 
Advance Warning Signs. The round, black -on-
yellow warning sign is placed ahead of a public 
railroad-highway cro ssing. The advance warning 
sign tells you to slow down, look and listen for the 
train, and be prepared to stop at the tracks if a train 
is coming. See Figure 10.5. 
 
 
Figure 10.5 
 
Pavement Markings. Pavement markings mean 
the same as the advance warning sign. They consist 
of an “X” with the letters “”RR” and a no -passing 
marking on two-lane roads. 
 

--- PAGE 136 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 10 – School Buses Page 10-8 
Version: July 2017 
There is also a no passing zone sign on two-lane 
roads. There may be a white stop line painted on 
the pavement before the railroad tracks. The front of 
the school bus must remain behind this line while 
stopped at the crossing. See Figure 10.6. 
Figure 10.6 
Cross-buck Signs. This sign marks the crossing. It 
requires you to yield the right- of-way to the train. If 
there is no white line painted on the pavement, y ou 
must stop the bus before the cross-buck sign. When 
the road crosses over more than one set of tracks, 
a sign below the cross-buck indicates the number of 
tracks. See Figure 10.7. 
Figure 10.7 
Flashing Red Light Signals. At many highway-rail 
grade crossings, the cross-buck sign has flashing 
red lights and bells. When the lights begin to flash, 
stop! A train is approaching. You are required to 
yield the right- of-way to the train. If there is more 
than one track, make sure all tracks are clear before 
crossing. See Figure 10.8. 
Gates. Many railroad-highway crossings have 
gates with flashing red lights and bells. Stop when 
the lights begin to flash and before the gate lowers 
across the road lane. Remain stopped until the 
gates go up and the lights have stopped flashing. 
Proceed when it is safe. If the gate stays down after 
the train passes, do not drive around the gate. 
Instead, call your dispatcher. See Figure 10.8. 
10.4.3 – Recommended Procedures 
Each state has laws and regulations governing how 
school buses must operate at railroad-highway 
crossings. It is important for you to understand and 
obey these state laws and regulations. In general, 
school buses must stop at all crossings, and ensure 
it is safe before proceeding across the tracks. The 
specific procedures required in each state vary. 
Figure 10.8 
A school bus is one of the safest vehicles on the 
highway. However, a school bus does not have the 
slightest edge when involved in a crash with a train. 
Because of a train’s size and weight it cannot stop 
quickly. An emergency escape route does not exist 
for a train. You can prevent school bus/train crashes 
by following these recommended procedures. 
Approaching the Crossing: 
Slow down, including shifting to a lower gear in a 
manual transmission bus, and test your brakes. 
Activate hazard lights approximately 200 feet before 
the crossing. Make sure your intentions are known. 

--- PAGE 137 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 10 – School Buses Page 10-9 
Version: July 2017 
Scan your surroundings and check for traffic behind 
you.  
Stay to the right of the roadway if possible. 
Choose an escape route in the event of a brake 
failure or problems behind you. 
At the Crossing: 
Stop no closer than 15 feet and no farther than 50 
feet from the nearest rail, where you have the best 
view of the tracks. 
Place the transmission in Park, or if there is no Park 
shift point, in Neutral and press down on the service 
brake or set the parking brakes. 
Turn off all radios and noisy equipment, and silence 
the passengers. 
Open the service door and driver’s window. Look 
and listen for an approaching train. 
Crossing the Track: 
Check the crossing signals again before 
proceeding. 
At a multiple-track crossing, stop only before the first 
set of tracks. When you are sure no train is 
approaching on any track, proceed across all of the 
tracks until you have completely cleared them. 
Cross the tracks in a low gear. Do not change gears 
while crossing. 
If the gate comes down after you have started 
across, drive through it even if it means you will 
break the gate. 
10.4.4 – Special Situations 
Bus Stalls or Trapped on Tracks. If your bus stalls 
or is trapped on the tracks, get everyone out and off 
the tracks immediately. Move everyone far from the 
bus at an angle, which is both away from the tracks 
and toward the train. 
Police Officer at the Crossing. If a police officer is 
at the crossing, obey directions. If there is no police 
officer, and you believe the signal is malfunctioning, 
call your dispatcher to report the situation and ask 
for instructions on how to proceed.  
Obstructed View of Tracks. Plan your route so it 
provides maximum sight distance at highway-rail 
grade crossings. Do not attempt to cross the tracks 
unless you can see far enough down the track to 
know for certain that no trains are approaching. 
Passive crossings are those that do not have any 
type of traffic control device. Be especially careful at 
“passive” crossings. Even if there are active railroad 
signals that indicate the tracks are clear, you must 
look and listen to be sure it is safe to proceed.  
Containment or Storage Areas. If it won’t fit, don’t 
commit! Know the length of your bus and the size of 
the containment area at highway-rail crossings on 
the school bus route, as well as any crossing you 
encounter in the course of a school activity trip. 
When approaching a crossing with a signal or stop 
sign on the opposite side, pay attention to the 
amount of room there. Be certain the bus has 
enough containment or storage area to completely 
clear the railroad tracks on the other side if there is 
a need to stop. As a general rule, add 15 feet to the 
length of the school bus to determine an acceptable 
amount of containment or storage area. 
10.5 – Student Management 
10.5.1 – Don’t Deal with On-bus Problems 
When Loading and Unloading 
In order to get students to and from school safely 
and on time, you need to be able to concentrate o n 
the driving task. 
Loading and unloading requires all your 
concentration. Don’t take your eyes off what is 
happening outside the bus. 
If there is a behavior problem on the bus, wait until 
the students unloading are safely off the bus and 
have moved away. If necessary, pull the bus over to 
handle the problem. 
10.5.2 – Handling Serious Problems 
Tips on handling serious problems: 
Follow your school’s procedures for discipline or 
refusal of rights to ride the bus. 
Stop the bus. Park in a safe location off the road, 
perhaps a parking lot or a driveway. 
Secure the bus. Take the ignition key with you if 
you leave your seat. 
Stand up and speak respectfully to the offender or 
offenders. Speak in a courteous manner with a firm 
voice. Remind the offender of the expected 
behavior. Do not show anger, but do show that you 
mean business. 
If a change of seating is needed, request that the 
student move to a seat near you. 
Never put a student off the bus except at school or 
at his or her designated school bus stop. If you feel 
that the offense is serious enough that you cannot 
safely drive the bus, call for a school administrator 
or the police to come and remove the student.  
Always follow your state or local procedures for 
requesting assistance.
--- PAGE 138 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 10 – School Buses Page 10-10 
Version: July 2017 
10.6 – Antilock Braking Systems 
10.6.1 – Vehicles Required to Have Antilock 
Braking Systems 
The Department of Transportation requires that 
antilock braking systems be on: 
Air brakes vehicles, (trucks, buses, trailers and 
converter dollies) built on or after March 1, 1998. 
Hydraulically braked trucks and buses with a gross 
vehicle weight rating of 10,000 lbs or more built on 
or after March 1, 1999. 
Many buses built before these dates have been 
voluntarily equipped with ABS. 
Your school bus will have a yellow ABS malfunction 
lamp on the instrument panel if it is equipped with 
ABS. 
10.6.2 – How ABS Helps You 
When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a 
vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up. 
When your steering wheels lock up, you lose 
steering control. When your other wheels lock up, 
you may skid or even spin the vehicle. 
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up and maintain 
control. You may or may not be able to stop faster 
with ABS, but you should be able to steer around an 
obstacle while braking, and avoid skids caused by 
over braking. 
10.6.3 – Braking with ABS 
When you drive a vehicle with ABS, you should 
brake as you always have. In other words: 
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely 
and stay in control. 
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you 
have ABS on the bus. However, in emergency 
braking, do not pump the brakes on a bus with 
ABS. 
As you slow down, monitor your bus and back off 
the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to stay in control. 
10.6.4 – Braking if ABS is Not Working 
Without ABS, you still have normal brake functions. 
Drive and brake as you always have. 
Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps to 
tell you if something is not working. The yellow ABS 
malfunction lamp is on the bus’s instrument panel. 
As a system check on newer vehicles, the 
malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb 
check and then goes out quickly. On older systems, 
the lamp could stay on until you are driving over five 
mph. 
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes on 
once you are under way, you may have lost AB S 
control at one or more wheels. 
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still have 
regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the system 
serviced soon. 
10.6.5 – Safety Reminders 
ABS won’t allow you to drive faster, follow more 
closely, or drive less carefully. 
ABS won’t prevent power or turning skids – 
ABS should prevent brake-induced skids but not 
those caused by spinning the drive wheels or 
going too fast in a turn. 
ABS won’t necessarily shorten stopping 
distance. ABS will help maintain vehicle control, 
but not always shorten stopping distance. 
ABS won’t increase or decrease ultimate 
stopping power – ABS is an “add-on” to your 
normal brakes, not a replacement for them. 
ABS won’t change the way you normally brake. 
Under normal brake conditions, your vehicle will 
stop as it always stopped. ABS only comes into 
play when a wheel would normally have locked up 
because of over braking. 
ABS won’t compensate for bad brakes or poor 
brake maintenance. 
Remember: The best vehicle safety feature is still 
a safe driver. 
Remember: Drive so you never need to use your 
ABS. 
Remember: If you need it, ABS could help to 
prevent a serious crash. 
10.7 – Special Safety Considerations 
10.7.1 – Strobe Lights 
Some school buses are equipped with roof-
mounted, white strobe lights. If your bus is so 
equipped, the overhead strobe light should be used 
when you have limited visibility. This means that you 
cannot easily see around you – in front, behind, or 
beside the school bus. Your visibility could be only 
slightly limited or it could be so bad that you can see 
nothing at all. In all instances, understand and obey 
your state or local regulations concerning the use of 
these lights. 
--- PAGE 139 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 10 – School Buses Page 10-11 
Version: July 2017 
10.7.2 – Driving in High Winds 
Strong winds affect the handling of the school bus! 
The side of a school bus acts like a sail on a 
sailboat. Strong winds can push the school bus 
sideways. They can even move the school bus off 
the road or, in extreme conditions, tip it over. 
If you are caught in strong winds: 
Keep a strong grip on the steering wheel. Try to 
anticipate gusts. 
You should slow down to lessen the effect of the 
wind, or pull off the roadway and wait. 
Contact your dispatcher to get more information on 
how to proceed. 
10.7.3 – Backing 
Backing a school bus is strongly discouraged. You 
should back your bus only when you have no other 
safe way to move the vehicle. You should never 
back a school bus when students are outside of the 
bus. Backing is dangerous and increases your risk 
of a collision. If you have no choice and you must 
back your bus, follow these procedures: 
Post a lookout. The purpose of the lookout is to 
warn you about obstacles, approaching persons, 
and other vehicles. The lookout should not give 
directions on how to back the bus. 
Signal for quiet on the bus. 
Constantly check all mirrors and rear windows. 
Back slowly and smoothly. 
If no lookout is available: 
Set the parking brake. 
Turn off the motor and take the keys with you. 
Walk to the rear of the bus to determine whether the 
way is clear. 
If you must back-up at a student pick-up point, be 
sure to pick up students before backing and watch 
for late comers at all times. 
Be sure that all students are in the bus before 
backing. 
If you must back-up at a student drop-off point, be 
sure to unload students after backing. 
10.7.4 – Tail Swing 
A school bus can have up to a three-foot tail swing. 
You need to check your mirrors before and during 
any turning movements to monitor the tail swing. 
Section 10 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. Define the danger zone. How far does the
danger zone extend around the bus?
2. What should you be able to see if the
outside flat mirrors are adjusted properly?
The outside convex mirrors? The crossover
mirrors?
3. You are loading students along the route.
When should you activate your alternating
flashing amber warning lights?
4. You are unloading students along your
route. Where should students walk to after
exiting the bus?
5. After unloading at school, why should you
walk through the bus?
6. What position should students be in front of
the bus before they cross the roadway?
7. Under what conditions must you evacuate
the bus?
8. How far from the nearest rail should you
stop at a highway-rail crossing?
9. What is a passive highway-rail crossing?
Why should you be extra cautious at this
type of crossing?
10. How should you use your brakes if your
vehicle is equipped with antilock brakes
(ABS)?
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read Section 10. 
--- PAGE 140 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
