Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection  Page 11-1 
Version: July 2017
Section 11  
Vehicle Inspection Test 
This Section Covers 
 Internal Inspection
 External Inspection
During the Vehicle inspection , you must show that 
the vehicl e is saf e to drive . You will hav e to walk 
around the vehicle, name and point to/ touch each 
item and explain to the examiner what you are 
checking and why.  
Any vehicle that has components marked or labeled 
cannot be used for the Vehicle Inspection test. 
11.1 All Vehicles 
Study the following vehicle parts for the type of 
vehicle you will be using during the CDL skills tests. 
You should be able to identify each part and tell the 
examiner what you are looking for or inspecting. 
11.1.1 Engine Compartment (Engine Off) 
Leaks/Hoses 
Look for puddles on the ground. 
Look for dripping fluids on underside of engine and 
transmission. 
Inspect hoses for condition and leaks. 
Oil Level 
Check oil level when engine is off. 
Indicate where dipstick is located. 
 Check that the oil level is within safe operating 
range. Level must be above refill mark. 
Coolant Level 
Looks at sight glass on radiator or coolant reservoir; 
adequate level will show in sight glass. If no sight 
glass is available, you must describe what s/he 
would look for after removing radiator cap. 
Power Steering Fluid 
Checks the dipstick and sees where the fluid level is 
relative to the refill mark or checks sight glass. Level 
must be above refill mark. 
Engine Compartment Belts 
Check the following belts for snugness (1/2 to 3/4 
inch play at center of belt), cracks, frays,loose 
fibers or signs of wear: 
Power steering belt. 
Water pump belt. 
Alternator belt. 
Air compressor belt. 
Note: If any of the components listed above are 
not belt driven, you must: 
Tell the examiner which component(s) are not belt 
driven. 
Make sure component(s) are operating properly, 
are not damaged or leaking, and are mounted 
securely. 
Hydraulic Brakes Master Cylinder & Brake Fluid 
Checks that master cylinder is securely attached 
and not leaking 
Checks the level of brake fluid in the reservoir to 
ensure it is between the add and full marks 
Safe Start 
Place gearshift lever in neutral (or park, for 
automatic transmissions). 
Depress clutch before attempting to start the 
vehicle 
Start the vehicle and keep clutch depressed until 
engine reaches idling speed. 
Then release clutch slowly. 
11.1.2 – Cab Check/Engine Start 
Oil Pressure Gauge 
Make sure oil pressure gauge is working. 
Check that pressure gauge shows increasing or 
normal oil pressure or that the warning light goes 
off. 
If equipped, oil temperature gauge should begin a 
gradual rise to the normal operating range. 
Temperature Gauge 
Make sure the temperature gauge is working. 
Temperature should begin to climb to the normal 
operating range or temperature light should be off. 
--- PAGE 141 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection  Page 11-2 
Version: July 2017 
Check that the air gauge is working properly and 
that the air compressor builds the air pressure to 
governor cut-out at approximately 120-140 psi or 
as specified by manufacturer.   
Ammeter/Voltmeter 
Check that gauges show alternator and/or 
generator is charging or that warning light is off. 
Mirrors and Windshield 
Mirrors should be clean and adjusted properly from 
the inside. 
Windshield should be clean with no illegal stickers, 
no obstructions, or damage to the glass. 
Emergency Equipment 
Check for spare electrical fuses.  
Check for three red reflective triangles and 6 
fusees or 3 liquid burning flares. 
Check that the fire extinguisher is  properly 
charged and securely mounted. 
Note: If the vehicle is not equipped with electrical 
fuses, you must mention this to the examiner. 
Wipers/Washers 
Check that wiper arms and blades are secure, not 
damaged, and operate smoothly. 
If equipped, windshield washers must operate 
correctly. 
Lights/Reflectors/Reflector Tape Condition 
(Sides & Rear) 
Test that dash indicators work when corresponding 
lights are turned on: 
Left turn signal. 
Right turn signal. 
Four-way emergency flashers. 
High beam headlight.  
Anti-lock Braking System (ABS) indicator. 
Check that all external lights and reflective 
equipment are clean and functional and none or 
broken or missing. Light and reflector checks 
include verification of correct color: 
Clearance lights (red on rear, amber elsewhere). 
Headlights (high and low beams). 
Taillights. 
Backing lights. 
Turn signals. 
Four-way flashers. 
Brake lights. 
Red reflectors (on rear) and amber reflectors 
(elsewhere). 
Air Gauge
--- PAGE 142 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection  Page 11-3 
Version: July 2017
Reflector tape condition 
Note: Checks of brake, turn signal and four-way 
flasher functions must be done separately. 
Horn 
Check that air horn and/or electric horn work. 
Heater/Defroster 
Test that the heater and defroster work. 
Parking Brake Check 
With air pressure built to governor cutout and the 
parking brake engaged (trailer brakes released on 
combination vehicles), check that the parking brake 
will hold vehicle by gently trying to pull forward with 
parking brake on. 
With air pressure built to governor cutout, the 
parking brake released and the trailer parking 
brake engaged (combination vehicles only), check 
that the trailer parking brake will hold vehicle by 
gently trying to pull forward with the trailer parking 
brake on. 
Hydraulic Brake Check 
Failure to perform both components of the 
hydraulic brake check will result in an automatic 
failure of the vehicle inspection test. 
1. Pump the brake pedal three times, then hold it
down for five seconds. The brake pedal should
not move (depress) during the five seconds.
2. If equipped with a hydraulic brake reserve
(back-up) system, with the key off, depress the
brake pedal and listen for the sound of the
reserve system electric motor.
3. Check that the warning buzzer or light is off.
Air Brake Check (Air Brake Equipped Vehicles 
Only) 
Failure to perform all three components of the air 
brake check correctly will result in an automatic 
failure of the vehicle inspection test. Air brake safety 
devices vary. However, this procedure is designed 
to see that any safety device operates correctly as 
air pressure drops from normal to a low air 
condition. For safety purposes, in areas where an 
incline is present, you will use wheel chocks during 
the air brake check. The proper procedures for 
inspecting the air brake system are as follows: 
1. With the air pressure built up to governor cutoff
(120 – 140 psi), shut off the engine leaving  the
key in the “on” or “battery charge” position ,
chock your wheels if necessary, release the
parking brake (all vehicles), and the tractor
protection valve (combination vehicle) and fully 
apply the foot brake.  Hold the foot brake for one 
minute. Check the air gauge to see if the air 
pressure drops more than three pounds in one 
minute (single vehicle) or four pounds in one 
minute (combination vehicle). 
2. Begin fanning off the air pressure by rapidly
applying and releasing the foot brake. Low air
warning devices (buzzer, light, flag) should
activate before air pressure drops below 55 psi
or level specified by the manufacturer.
3. Continue to fan off the air pressure. At a range
between 20 – 45 psi on a tractor-trailer
combination vehicle (or level specified by the
manufacturer), the tractor protection valve and
parking brake valve should close (pop out). On
other combination vehicle types and single
vehicle types, the parking brake valve should
close (pop out).
Service Brake Check 
You will be required to check the application of air 
or hydraulic service brakes.  This procedure is 
designed to determine that the brakes are working 
correctly and that the vehicle does not pull to one 
side or the other. 
Pull forward at 5 mph, apply the service brake and 
stop.  Check to see that the vehicle does not pull to 
ei
ther side and that it stops when brake is applied. 
Safety Belt 
Check that the safety belt is securely mounted, 
adjusts, latches properly and is not ripped or 
frayed. 
11.2 – External Inspection (All Vehicles) 
11.2.1– Steering 
Steering Box/Hoses 
Check that the steering box is securely mounted 
and not leaking. Look for any missing nuts and/or , 
bolts. 
Check for power steering fluid leaks or damage to 
power steering hoses. 
Steering Linkage 
See that connecting links, arms, and rods from the 
steering box to the wheel are not worn or cracked. 
Check that joints and sockets are not worn or loose 
and that there are no missing nuts, bolts, or cotter 
keys. 
--- PAGE 143 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection   Page 11-4 
Version: July 2017  
11.2.2 – Suspension 
Springs/Air/Torque 
Look for missing, shifted, cracked, or broken leaf 
springs. 
Look for broken or distorted coil springs. 
If vehicle is equipped with torsion bars, torque 
arms, or other types of suspension components, 
check that they are not damaged and are mounted 
securely. 
Air ride suspension should be checked for damage 
and leaks. 
 
Mounts 
Look for cracked or broken spring hangers, 
missing or damaged bushings, and broken, loose, 
or missing bolts, u-bolts or other axle mounting 
parts. (The mounts should be checked at each 
point where they are secured to the vehicle frame 
and axle[s]). 
 
Shock Absorbers 
See that shock absorbers are secure and that 
there are no leaks. 
 
Note: Be prepared to perform the same 
suspension components inspection on every axl e 
(power unit and trailer, if equipped). 
 
11.2.3 – Brakes 
 
Slack Adjustors and Pushrods 
Look for broken, loose, or missing parts. 
For manual slack adjustors, the brake pushrod 
should not move more than one inch (with the 
brakes released) when pulled by hand. 
 
Brake Chambers 
See that brake chambers are not leaking, cracked, 
or dented and are mounted securely. There are no 
loose or missing clamps. 
 
Brake Hoses/Lines 
Look for cracked, worn, or leaking hoses, lines, 
and couplings. 
 
Drum Brake 
Check for cracks, dents, or holes. Also check for 
loose or missing bolts. 
Check for contaminates such debris or oil/grease.    
Brake linings (where visible) should not be worn 
dangerously thin. 
 
Brake Linings 
On some brake drums, there are openings where 
the brake linings can be seen from outside the 
drum. For this type of drum, check that a visible 
amount of brake lining is showing. 
 
Note: Be prepared to perform the same brake 
components inspection on every axle (power unit 
and trailer, if equipped). 
 
11.2.4 – Wheels 
 
Rims 
Check for damaged or bent rims. Rims cannot 
have welding repairs.  Check rims for rust trails 
that may indicate the rim is loose on the wheel. 
 
Tires 
The following items must be inspected on every 
tire: 
Tread depth: Check for minimum tread depth (4/32 
on steering axle tires, 2/32 on all other tires). 
Tire condition: Check that tread is evenly worn and 
look for cuts or other damage to tread or sidewalls. 
Also, make sure that valve caps and stems are not 
missing, broken, or damaged. 
Tire inflation: Check for proper inflation by using a 
tire gauge.  Note:  You will not get credit if you simply 
kick the tires or use a mallet to check for proper 
inflation. 
 
Hub Oil Seals/Axle Seals 
See that hub oil/grease seals and axle seals are not 
leaking and, if wheel has a s ight glass, oil level is 
adequate. 
 
Lug Nuts 
Check that all lug nuts are present, free of cracks 
and distortions, and show no signs of looseness 
such as rust trails or shiny threads. 
Make sure all bolt holes are not cracked or distorted. 
 
Spacers or Budd Spacing 
 
If equipped, check that spacers are not bent, 
damaged, or rusted through; and are centered with 
dual wheels and tires evenly separated.. 
 
Check the space between the tires for debris 
and/or foreign objects. 
 
Note: Be prepared to perform the same wh eel 
inspection on every axle (power unit and trailer, if 
equipped). 
--- PAGE 144 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection  Page 11-5 
Version: July 2017
11.2.5 – Side of Vehicle 
Door(s)/Mirror(s) 
Check that door(s) are not damaged and that they 
open and close properly from the outside.  
Hinges should be secure with seals intact. 
Check that mirror(s) and mirror brackets are not 
damaged and are mounted securely with no loose 
fittings. 
Fuel Tank 
Check that tank(s) are secure, cap(s) are tight, and 
that there are no leaks from tank(s) or lines. 
Drive Shaft 
See that drive shaft is not bent or cracked. 
Couplings should be secure and free of foreign 
objects. 
Exhaust System 
Check system for damage and signs of leaks such 
as rust or carbon soot.  Exhaust system should not 
have cracks, holes or severe dents 
System should be connected tightly and mounted 
securely. 
If equipped with emissions after-treatment 
equipment: 
Checks DEF tank to ensure the level of diesel 
exhaust fluid in the tank is adequate (more than 
1/8th tank) 
Checks that DEF indicator on the dash is working 
properly  
Frame 
Look for cracks, broken welds, holes or other 
damage to the longitudinal frame members, cross 
members, box, and floor. 
11.2.6 – Rear of Vehicle 
Splash Guards 
If equipped, check that splash guards or mud flaps 
are not damaged and are mounted securely. 
Doors/Ties/Lifts 
Check that doors and hinges are not damaged and 
that they open, close, and latch properly from the 
outside, if equipped. 
Ties, straps, chains, and binders must also be 
secure. 
If equipped with a cargo lift, look for leaking, 
damaged or missing parts and explain how it 
should be checked for correct operation. 
Lift must be fully retracted and latched securely. 
--- PAGE 145 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection   Page 11-6 
Version: July 2017  
11.2.7 – Tractor/Coupling 
 
Air/Electric Lines 
Listen for air leaks. Check that air hoses and 
electrical lines are not cut, chafed, spliced, or worn 
(steel braid should not show through). 
Make sure air and electrical lines are not tangled, 
pinched, or dragging against tractor parts. 
 
Catwalk/Steps 
Check that the catwalk is solid, clear of objects, 
and securely bolted to tractor frame. 
Check that steps leading to the cab entry and 
catwalk (if equipped) are solid, clear of objects, 
and securely bolted to tractor frame. 
 
Mounting Bolts 
Look for loose or missing mounting brackets, 
clamps, bolts, or nuts. Both the fifth wheel and the 
slide mounting must be solidly attached. 
Check for loose or missing mounting bolts and for 
broken welds for pintle hook or other type of hitch 
mount, and tongue/draw-bar assembly to ensure 
that they are solidly attached in place. 
On other types of coupling systems (i.e., ball hitch, 
pintle hook, etc.), inspect all coupling components 
and mounting brackets for missing or broken parts. 
 
Hitch Release Lever 
Check to see that the hitch release lever is in place 
and is secure. 
 
Locking Jaws 
Look into fifth wheel gap and check that locking 
jaws are fully closed around the kingpin. 
On other types of coupling systems (i.e., ball hitch, 
pintle hook, etc.), inspect the locking mechanism 
for missing or broken parts and make sure it is 
locked securely. If present, safety cables or chains 
must be secure and free of kinks and excessive 
slack. 
 
5th Wheel Skid Plate 
Check for proper lubrication and that 5th wheel skid 
plate is securely mounted to the platform and that 
all bolts and pins are secure and not missing. 
 
Platform (Fifth Wheel) 
Check for cracks or breaks in the platform structure 
which supports the fifth wheel skid plate. 
 
Release Arm (Fifth Wheel) 
If equipped, make sure the release arm is in the 
engaged position and the safety latch is in place. 
 
Kingpin/Apron/Gap 
Explain that locking jaws holds kingpin in place 
and that the kingpin is not bent or damaged 
Make sure the visible part of the apron is not bent, 
cracked, or broken. 
Check that the trailer is lying flat on the fifth wheel 
skid plate (no gap). 
Check for kingpin lock. 
 
Locking Pins (Fifth Wheel) 
If equipped, look for loose or missing pins in the 
slide mechanism of the sliding fifth wheel. If air 
powered, check for leaks. 
Make sure locking pins are fully engaged. 
Check that the fifth wheel is positioned properly so 
that the tractor frame will clear the landing gear 
during turns. 
 
Sliding Pintle 
Check the sliding pintle hook for excessive wear 
and to ensure it is secure with no loose or missing 
nuts or bolts and cotter pin is in place. 
 
Tongue or Draw-bar 
Check that the tongue/draw-bar is not bent or 
twisted and checks for broken welds and stress 
cracks. 
Check that the tongue/draw-bar eye is not worn 
excessively. 
Tongue Storage Area 
Check that the storage area is solid and secured to 
the tongue. 
Check that cargo in the storage area i.e. chains, 
binders, etc. are secure. 
 
 
11.3 – School Bus Only 
Emergency Equipment 
In addition to checking for spare electrical fuses (if 
equipped), three red reflective triangles, 6 fusees 
or 3 liquid burning flares and a properly charged 
and rated fire extinguisher, school bus drivers must 
also inspect the following emergency equipment: 
Emergency Kit 
Body Fluid Cleanup Kit 
 
--- PAGE 146 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection  Page 11-7 
Version: July 2017
Lighting Indicators 
In addition to checking the lighting indicators listed 
in Section 10.2 of this manual, school bus drivers 
must also check the following lighting indicators 
(internal panel lights): 
Alternately flashing amber lights indicator, if 
equipped. 
Alternately flashing red lights indicator. 
Strobe light indicator, if equipped. 
Lights/Reflectors 
In addition to checking the lights and reflective 
devices listed in Section 10.2 of this manual, 
school bus drivers must also check the following 
(external) lights and reflectors: 
Strobe light, if equipped is operational and is not 
broken. 
Stop arm light, if equipped. 
Alternately flashing amber lights, if equipped are 
operational and not broken. 
Alternately flashing red lights, on both the front and 
back of the vehicle are operational and not 
broken.. 
Student Mirrors 
In addition to checking the external mirrors, school 
bus drivers must also check the internal and 
external mirrors used for observing students: 
Check for proper adjustment. 
Checks that all internal and external mirrors and 
mirror brackets are not damaged and are mounted 
securely with no loose fittings. 
Checks that visibility is not impaired due to dirty 
mirrors. 
Stop Arm/Safety Arm 
If equipped, check the stop arm to see that it is 
mounted securely to the frame of the vehicle. Also, 
check for loose fittings and damage.  
Checks that 
stop arm extends fully when operated 
Passenger Entry/Lift 
Check that the entry door is not damaged, 
operates smoothly, and closes securely from the 
inside.  
Hand rails are secure and the step light is working, 
if equipped. 
The entry steps must be clear with the treads not 
loose or worn excessively. 
If equipped with a handicap lift, look for leaking, 
damaged, or missing parts and explain how lift 
should be checked for correct operation. Lift must 
be fully retracted and latched securely. 
Emergency Exit 
Demonstrate that at least one  emergency exit is  
not damaged, operates smoothly, and closes 
securely from the inside.   
Check that release handle can be operated 
properly from both inside and outside the vehicle. 
Point out and describe how all other emergency 
exits operate 
Check that any emergency exit warning devices 
are working properly. 
Seating 
Look for broken seat frames and check that seat 
frames are firmly attached to the floor. 
Check that seat cushions are attached securely to 
the seat frames. 
11.4 – Trailer 
11.4.1 – Trailer Front 
Air/Electrical Connections 
Check that trailer air connectors are sealed and in 
good condition. 
Make sure glad hands are locked in place, free of 
damage or air leaks. 
Make sure the trailer electrical plug is firmly seated 
and locked in place. 
Header Board 
If equipped, check the header board to see that it 
is secure, free of damage, and strong enough to 
contain cargo. 
If equipped, the canvas or tarp carrier must be 
mounted and fastened securely. 
On enclosed trailers, check the front area for signs 
of damage such as cracks, bulges, or holes. 
11.4.2 – Side of Trailer 
Landing Gear 
Check that the landing gear is fully raised, has no 
missing parts, crank handle is secure, and the 
support frame and landing pads are  not damaged. 
If power operated, check for air or hydraulic leaks. 
--- PAGE 147 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection   Page 11-8 
Version: July 2017  
Doors/Ties/Lifts 
If equipped, check that doors are not damaged. 
Check that doors open, close, and latch properly 
from the outside. 
Check that ties, straps, chains, and binders are 
secure. 
If equipped with a cargo lift, look for leaking, 
damaged or missing parts and explain how it 
should be checked for correct operation. 
Lift should be fully retracted and latched securely. 
Frame 
Look for cracks, broken welds, holes or other 
damage to the frame, cross members, box, and 
floor. 
 
Tandem Release Arm/Locking Pins 
If equipped, make sure the locking pins are locked 
in place and release arm is secured. 
11.4.3 – Remainder of Trailer 
Remainder of Trailer 
Please refer to Section 11.2 of this manual for 
detailed inspection procedures regarding the 
following components: 
Wheels. 
Suspension system.  
Brakes. 
Doors/ties/lift. 
Splash guards. 
 
11.5 – Coach/Transit Bus 
 
11.5.1 – Passenger Items 
Passenger Entry/Lift 
Check that entry doors operate smoothly and close 
securely from the inside. 
Check that hand rails are secure and, if equipped, 
that the step light(s) are working. 
Check that the entry steps are clear, with the 
treads not loose or worn excessively. 
If equipped with a handicap lift, look for any 
leaking, damaged or missing part, and explain how 
it should be checked for correct operation. 
Lift should be fully retracted and latched securely. 
 
Emergency Exits 
Make sure that all emergency exits are not 
damaged, operate smoothly, and close securely 
from the inside. 
Check that any emergency exit warning devices 
are working. 
 
Passenger Seating 
Look for broken seat frames and check that seat 
frames are firmly attached to the floor. 
Check that seat cushions are attached securely to 
the seat frames. 
 
11.5.2 – Entry/ Exit 
Doors/Mirrors 
Check that entry/exit doors are not damaged and 
operate smoothly from the outside. Hinges should 
be secure with seals intact. 
Make sure that the passenger exit mirrors and all 
external mirrors and mirror brackets are not 
damaged and are mounted securely with no loose 
fittings. 
11.5.3 – External Inspection of Coach/ Transit 
Bus 
 
Level/Air Leaks 
See that the vehicle is sitting level (front and rear), 
and if air-equipped, check for audible air leaks from 
the suspension system.  
 
Fuel Tank(s) 
See that fuel tank(s) are secure with no leaks from 
tank(s) or lines. 
 
Baggage Compartments 
Check that baggage and all other exterior 
compartment doors are not damaged, operate 
properly, and latch securely. 
 
Battery/Box 
Wherever located, see that battery(s) are secure, 
connections are tight, and cell caps are present. 
Battery connections should not show signs of 
excessive corrosion. 
Check that battery box and cover or door is not 
damaged and is secure. 
--- PAGE 148 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection  Page 11-9 
Version: July 2017
11.5.4 – Remainder of Coach/ Transit Bus 
Remainder of Vehicle 
Please refer to Section 11.2 of this manual for 
detailed inspection procedures for the remainder of 
the vehicle. 
Remember, the Vehicle Inspection must be passed 
before you can proceed to the Basic Control Skills 
test. 
11.6 – Taking the CDL Vehicle 
Inspection Test 
11.6.1 – Class A Vehicle Inspection Test 
If you are applying for a Class A CDL, you will be 
required to perform one of the four versions of a 
Vehicle inspection in the vehicle you have brought 
with you for testing. Each of the four tests are 
equivalent and you will not know which test you will 
take until just before the testing begins. 
All of the tests include an engine start, an in-cab-
inspection, and an inspection of the coupling 
system. Then, your test may require an inspection 
of the entire vehicle or only a portion of the vehicle 
which your CDL Examiner will explain to you. 
11.6.2 – Class B and C Vehicle Inspection Test 
If you are applying for a Class B CDL, you will be 
required to perform one of the three versions of a 
Vehicle inspection in the vehicle you have brought 
with you for testing. Each of the three tests are 
equivalent and you will not know which test you will 
take until just before the testing begins. 
All of the tests include an engine start and an in-
cab inspection . Then, your test may require an 
inspection of the entire vehicle or only a portion of 
the vehicle which your CDL Examiner will explain to 
you. You will also have to inspect any special 
features of your vehicle (e.g, school or transit bus).
--- PAGE 149 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection  Page 11-9 
Version: July 2017

--- PAGE 150 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
