Section 12 – Basic Control Skills  Page 12-1 
Version: July 2017
Section 12  
Basic Vehicle Control 
Skills Test 
This Section Covers 
 Skills Test Scoring
 Skills Test Exercises
Your basic control skills could be tested using one 
or more of the following exercises off-road or 
somewhere on the street during the road test: 
Straight line backing. 
Offset back/right 
Offset back/left 
Parallel park (driver side). 
Parallel park (conventional). 
Alley dock. 
These exercises are shown in Figures 12-1 through 
12-6. 
12.1 Scoring 
Crossing Boundaries (encroachments) 
Pull-ups 
Outside Vehicle Observations (looks) 
Final Position/Inside Parallel 
Encroachments – The examiner will score the 
number of times you touch or cross over an exercise 
boundary line or cone with any portion of your 
vehicle. Each encroachment will count as an error. 
Pull-ups –   When a driver stops and pulls forward 
to clear an encroachment or to get a better position, 
it is scored as a “pull-up”. Stopping without changing 
direction does not count as a pull-up.  You will not 
be penalized for initial pull-ups. However, an 
excessive number of pull-ups, will count as errors. 
Outside Vehicle Observations (Looks)  – You 
may be permitted to safely stop and exit the vehicle 
to check the external position of the vehicle (look).  
When doing so, you must place the vehicle in 
neutral and set the parking brake(s).  Then, when 
exiting the vehicle, you must do so safely by facing 
the vehicle and maintaining three points of contact 
with the vehicle at all times (when exiting a bus, 
maintain a firm grasp on the handrail at all times).  If 
you do not safely secure the vehicle or safely exit 
the vehicle it may result in an automatic failure of 
the basic control skills test.    
The maximum number of times that you may look to 
check the position of you vehicle is two (2) except 
for the Straight Line Backing exercise, which allows 
one look.  Each time you open the door, move from 
a seated position where in physical control of the 
vehicle or on a bus walk to the back of a bus to get 
a better view, it is scored as a “look”.  
Final Position/Inside Parallel – It is important that 
you finish each exercise exactly as the examiner 
has instructed you. If you do not maneuver the 
vehicle into its final position as described by the 
examiner, you will be penalized and could fail the 
basic skills test. 
12.2 Exercises 
12.2.1 – Straight Line Backing 
You may be asked to back your vehicle in a straight 
line between two rows of cones without touching or 
crossing over the exercise boundaries. (See Figure 
12.1.) 
12.2.2 – Offset Back/Right 
You may be asked to back into a space that is to the 
right rear of your vehicle. You will drive straight 
forward the outer boundary.  From that position you 
must back the vehicle into the opposite lane until 
the front of your vehicle has passed the first set of 
cones without striking boundary lines or cones. (See 
Figure 12.2) 
12.2.3 – Offset Back/Left 
You may be asked to back into a space that is to the 
left rear of your vehicle. You will drive straight 
forward the outer boundary.  From that position, you 
must back the vehicle into the opposite lane until the 
front of your vehicle has passed the first set of cones 
without striking boundary lines or cones.  (See 
Figure 12.3) 
12.2.4 – Parallel Park (Driver Side) 
You may be asked to park in a parallel parking 
space that is on your left. You are to drive past the 
entrance to the parallel parking space with your 
vehicle parallel to the parking area; and back into 
the space without crossing front, side or rear 
boundaries marked by cones. You are required to 
get your entire vehicle completely into the space. 
(See Figure 12.4) 
--- PAGE 151 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 12 – Basic Control Skills   Page 12-2 
Version: July 2017  
12.2.5 – Parallel Park (Conventional) 
 
You may be asked to park in a parallel parking 
space that is on your right. You are to drive past the 
entrance to the parallel parking space wi th your 
vehicle parallel to the parking area; and back into 
the space without crossing front, side or rear 
boundaries marked by cones. You are required to 
get your entire vehicle completely into the space . 
(See Figure 12.5) 
 
12.2.6 – Alley Dock 
 
You may be  asked to sight -side back your vehicle 
into an alley .  You will drive past the alley and 
position your vehicle parallel to the outer boundary.  
From that position, back into the alley bringing the 
rear of your vehicle within three feet of the rear of 
the alley without touching boundary lines or cones .  
Your vehicle must be straight within the alley /lane 
when you have completed the maneuver. (See 
Figure 12.6.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- PAGE 152 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 12 – Basic Control Skills  Page 12-3 
Version: July 2017
Figure 12.1: Straight Line Backing 
Figure 12.2: Offset Back/Right
Figure 12.3: Offset Back/Left 

--- PAGE 153 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 12 – Basic Control Skills   Page 12-4 
Version: July 2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.4: Parallel Park (Driver Side) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.5: Parallel Park (Conventional) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 154 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 12 – Basic Control Skills  Page 12-5 
Version: July 2017
Figure 12.6: Alley Dock 
90° Alley Dock 
--- PAGE 155 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 13 – On-road Driving Page 13-1 
Version: July 2017 
Section 13  
On-road Driving 
This Section Covers 
 How You Will Be Tested
You will drive over a test route that has a variety of 
traffic situations. At all times during the test, you 
must drive in a safe and responsible manner; and 
you must: 
Wear your safety belt. 
Obey all traffic signs, signals, and laws. 
Complete the test without an accident or moving 
violation. 
During the driving test, the examiner will be scoring 
you on specific driving maneuvers as well as on 
your general driving behavior. You will follow the 
directions of the examiner. Directions will be given 
to you so you will have plenty of time to do what the 
examiner has asked. You will not be asked to drive 
in an unsafe manner. 
If your test route does not have certain traffic 
situations, you may be asked to simulate a traffic 
situation. You will do this by telling the examiner 
what you are or would be doing if you were in that 
traffic situation. 
13.1 – How You Will Be Tested 
13.1.1 – Turns 
You have been asked to make a turn: 
Check traffic in all directions. 
Use turn signals and safely get into the lane 
needed for the turn. 
As you approach the turn: 
Use turn signals to warn others of your turn. 
Slow down smoothly, change gears as needed to 
keep power, but do not coast unsafely. Unsafe 
coasting occurs when your vehicle is out of gear 
(clutch depressed or gearshift in neutral) for more 
than the length of your vehicle. 
If you must stop before making the turn: 
Come to a smooth stop without skidding. 
Come to a complete stop behind the stop line, 
crosswalk, or stop sign. 
If stopping behind another vehicle, stop where you 
can see the rear tires on the vehicle ahead of you 
(safe gap). 
Do not let your vehicle roll. 
Keep the front wheels aimed straight ahead. 
When ready to turn: 
Check traffic in all directions. 
Keep both hands on the steering wheel during the 
turn. 
Keep checking your mirror to make sure the 
vehicle does not hit anything on the inside of the 
turn. 
Vehicle should not move into oncoming traffic. 
Vehicle should finish turn in correct lane. 
After turn: 
Make sure turn signal is off. 
Get up to speed of traffic, use turn signal, and 
move into right-most lane when safe to do so (if not 
already there). 
Check mirrors and traffic. 
13.1.2 – Intersections 
As you approach an intersection: 
Check traffic thoroughly in all directions. 
Decelerate gently. 
Brake smoothly and, if necessary, change gears. 
If necessary, come to a complete stop (no 
coasting) behind any stop signs, signals, 
sidewalks, or stop lines maintaining a safe gap 
behind any vehicle in front of you. 
Your vehicle must not roll forward or backward. 
When driving through an intersection: 
Check traffic thoroughly in all directions. 
Decelerate and yield to any pedestrians and traffic 
in the intersection. 
Do not change lanes while proceeding through the 
intersection. 
Keep your hands on the wheel. 
Once through the intersection: 
Continue checking mirrors and traffic. 
Accelerate smoothly and change gears as 
necessary. 
--- PAGE 156 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 13 – On-road Driving Page 13-2 
Version: July 2017 
13.1.3 – Urban Business 
During this part of the test, you are expected to 
make regular traffic checks and maintain a safe 
following distance. Your vehicle should be centered 
in the proper lane (right-most lane) and you should 
keep up with the flow of traffic but not exceed the 
posted speed limit. 
13.1.4 –Lane Changes 
During multiple lane portions of the test, you will be 
asked to change lanes to the left, and then back to 
the right. You should make the necessary traffic 
checks first, then use proper signals and smoothly 
change lanes when it is safe to do so. 
13.1.5 – Expressway or Rural/Limited Access 
Highway 
Before entering the expressway: 
Check traffic. 
Use proper signals. 
Merge smoothly into the proper lane of traffic. 
Once on the expressway: 
Maintain proper lane positioning, vehicle spacing, 
and vehicle speed.  
Continue to check traffic thoroughly in all directions. 
When exiting the expressway: 
Make necessary traffic checks. 
Use proper signals. 
Decelerate smoothly in the exit lane. 
Once on the exit ramp, you must continue to 
decelerate within the lane markings and maintain 
adequate spacing between your vehicle and other 
vehicles. 
13.1.6 – Stop/Start 
For this maneuver, you will be asked to pull your 
vehicle over to the side of the road and stop as if 
you were going to get out and check something on 
your vehicle. You must check traffic thoroughly in all 
directions and move to the right-most lane or 
shoulder of road. 
As you prepare for the stop: 
Check traffic. 
Activate your right turn signal. 
Decelerate smoothly, brake evenly, change gears 
as necessary. 
Bring your vehicle to a full stop without coasting. 
Once stopped: 
Vehicle must be parallel to the curb or shoulder of 
the road and safely out of the traffic flow. 
Vehicle should not be blocking driveways, fire 
hydrants, intersections, signs, etc. 
Cancel your turn signal. 
Activate your four-way emergency flashers. 
Apply the parking brake. 
Move the gear shift to neutral or park. 
Remove your feet from the brake and clutch pedals. 
When instructed to resume: 
Check traffic and your mirrors thoroughly in all 
directions. 
Turn off your four-way flashers. 
Activate the left turn signal. 
When traffic permits, you should release the parking 
brake and pull straight ahead.  
Do not turn the wheel before your vehicle moves. 
Check traffic from all directions, especially to the 
left. 
Steer and accelerate smoothly into the proper lane 
when safe to do so. 
Once your vehicle is back into the flow of traffic, 
cancel your left turn signal. 
13.1.7 – Curve 
When approaching a curve: 
Check traffic thoroughly in all directions. 
Before entering the curve, reduce speed so further 
braking or shifting is not required in the curve. 
Keep vehicle in the lane. 
Continue checking traffic in all directions. 
13.1.8 – Railroad Crossing 
Before reaching the crossing, all commercial drivers 
should: 
Decelerate, brake smoothly, and shift gears as 
necessary. 
Look and listen for the presence of trains. 
Check traffic in all directions. 
Do not stop, change gears, pass another vehicle, or 
change lanes while any part of your vehicle is in the 
crossing.  
--- PAGE 157 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System   
 
Section 13 – On-road Driving  Page 13-3 
Version: July 2017 
If you are driving a bus, a school bus, or a vehicle 
displaying placards, you should be prepared to 
observe the following procedures at every railroad 
crossing (unless the crossing is exempt):  
As the vehicle approaches a railroad crossing, 
activate the four-way flashers. 
Stop the vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 15 
feet from the nearest rail. 
Listen and look in both directions along the track 
for an approaching train and for signals indicating 
the approach of a train. If operating a bus, you may 
also be required to open the window and door prior 
to crossing tracks. 
Keep hands on the steering wheel as the vehicle 
crosses the tracks. 
Do not stop, change gears, or change lanes while 
any part of your vehicle is proceeding across the 
tracks.  
Four-way flashers should be deactivated after the 
vehicle crosses the tracks. 
Continue to check mirrors and traffic.  
 
Not all driving road test routes will have a railroad 
crossing. You may be asked to exp lain and 
demonstrate the proper railroad crossing 
procedures to the examiner at a simulated location. 
 
13.1.9 – Bridge/Overpass/Sign 
 
After driving under an overpass, you may be asked 
to tell the examiner what the posted clearance or 
height was. After goin g over a bridge, you may be 
asked to tell the examiner what the posted weight 
limit was. If your test route does not have a bridge 
or overpass, you may be asked about another traffic 
sign. When asked, be prepared to identify and 
explain to the examiner any  traffic sign which may 
appear on the route. 
 
13.1.10 – Student Discharge (School Bus) 
If you are applying for a School Bus endorsement, 
you will be required to demonstrate a student 
discharge. Please refer to section 10 of this manual.   
 
As you approach the student pick up, you must:  
Decelerate and a pproach at a slow rate of speed 
while continuing to check traffic.  
Activate amber warning lights and right turn signals. 
Move as far as possible to the right on the travel ed 
portion of the roadway.  
Recheck traffic.  
 
As you stop for the student discharge, you must: 
Bring school bus to a complete stop at least 10’ 
away from students at the stop. 
Place the transmission in neutral/park and set the 
parking brake.  
Activate the stop arm and red warning lights. 
 
When discharging students, you must:  
Communicate to students.  
Check traffic.  
Open the student door.  
Check for students.  
 
When students are crossing, you must:  
Check traffic.  
Communicate to students.  
Check for students.  
 
When resuming from the stud ent discharge, you 
must:  
Check all mirrors.  
Turn off warning lights and stop arm. 
Close the door  
Check traffic.  
Accelerate away from the stop area.  
 
13.1.11 – General Driving Behaviors 
You will be scored on your overall performance in 
the following general driving behavior categories: 
 
13.1.11(a) – Clutch Usage (for Manual 
Transmission) 
Always use clutch to shift. 
If equipped with an unsynchronized manual 
transmission, you must double-clutch when 
shifting. Do not rev or lug the engine. 
Do not ride clutch to control speed, coast with the 
clutch depressed, or "pop" the clutch. 
 
13.1.12(b) – Gear Usage (for Manual 
Transmission) 
Do not grind or clash gears. 
Select gear that does not rev or lug engine. 
Do not shift in turns and intersections. 
 
--- PAGE 158 ---
Commercial Driver’s License Manual – 2005 CDL Testing System 
Section 13 – On-road Driving Page 13-4 
Version: July 2017 
13.1.13(c) – Brake Usage 
Do not ride or pump brake. 
Do not brake harshly. Brake smoothly using steady 
pressure. 
13.1.14(d) – Lane Usage 
Do not put vehicle over curbs, sidewalks, or lane 
markings. 
Stop behind stop lines, crosswalks, or stop signs. 
Complete a turn in the proper lane on a multiple 
lane road (vehicle should finish a left turn in the 
lane directly to the right of the center line). 
Finish a right turn in the right-most (curb) lane. 
Move to or remain in right-most lane unless lane is 
blocked. 
13.1.15 – Steering 
Do not over or under steer the vehicle. 
Keep both hands on the steering wheel at all times 
unless shifting.  Once you have completed shift, 
return both hands to the steering wheel.   
13.1.16 – Regular Traffic Checks 
Check traffic regularly. 
Check mirrors regularly. 
Check mirrors and traffic before, while in and after 
an intersection.   
Scan and check traffic in high volume areas and 
areas where pedestrians are expected to be 
present.   
13.1.17 – Use of Turn Signals 
Use turn signals properly.  
Activate turn signals when required. 
Activate turn signals at appropriate times. 
Cancel turn signals upon completion of a turn or 
lane change. 
--- PAGE 159 ---

