  Wisconsin
CDL Instructor

  Guidelines

         July 2025

                                        1
                                                                                  Women and youth
                                                                                       are forced

                                                                                    into prostitution
                                                                                        along our

                                                                                  nation's highways.
                                                                                     You can help.

Everyday Heroes Needed

Human trafficking is modern-day slavery, where traffickers use force, fraud and
coercion to control their victims. It can occur in many locations, including truck stops,
hotels, restaurants, rest areas, brothels, strip clubs, private homes, etc. Any minor
engaged in commercial sex is a victim of human trafficking.

                                                                                           Truckers are the eyes and ears of our nation's highways and are
                                                                                           already making calls that save lives. They are Everyday Heroes . . . like
                                                                                           Kevin Kimmel, whose call rescued a 20-year-old woman being sold,
                                                                                           beaten, tortured and repeatedly raped in the back of an RV parked at
                                                                                           the back of a truck stop, or Joe Aguayo, who saw a young trafficking
                                                                                           victim who'd been drugged, beaten, raped and abandoned along a
                                                                                           remote road, with her head shaved and nothing but a towel for
                                                                                           covering. Because professional drivers often find themselves in
                                                                                           locations frequented and exploited by human traffickers, they're in a
                                                                                           unique position to recognize the signs of human trafficking and make
                                                                                           the call that can lead to victim recovery and perpetrator arrests.

Truckers Against Trafficking (TAT) has been working with                  Scan this QR code
members of the transportation industry since 2009 to provide
the needed training and tools to enable members of these key                to download            Make the Call, Save Lives.
industries to both recognize and report human trafficking                 on Apple devices    Call 911 to report human trafficking!
when they see it happening. TAT has wallet cards with red
flags to look for, questions to ask if you suspect someone is a                               For victim services call the national hotline:
victim and actionable information to report. Ths wallet card is
avail-able by app, from the appropriate app store, or by                                      1-888-373-7888 (US)
emailing info@truckersagainsttrafficking.org for a version to
carry in your wallet. Additionally, TAT provides a powerful, 26-                              1-833-900-1010 (Canada)
minute video on its website
(www.truckersagainsttrafficking.org), with, when watched                                      www.truckersagainsttrafficking.org
along with taking and passing a short test, certifies drivers as
TAT-Trained, a designation which can go on your resume.                   Scan this QR code
                                                                            to download
                                                                       2
                                                                          on Android devices
This study guide is intended for potential CDL instructors for Driver Training Schools. The items included have been
taken from the larger more extensive Driver Training School Guidelines that also provides information on starting
your own school and other types of operations. Creating this smaller version will allow prospective CDL instructors
the ability to concentrate on instructor material solely while they are preparing for their CDL instructor knowledge
exam. If the applicant is unsuccessful in their testing attempt, the reference sheet provided by the service center
references the original Driver Training School & Instructor guidelines, NOT this smaller version.

The chapters have been kept at the beginning of each block as a reference point back to the full Guidelines if you wish
a more detailed overview of certain topics. Although this smaller version is for instructors only you will see some
references to ownership duties and responsibilities that instructors should be aware of.

         Chapter One: General Driver Training School and Instructor Information

Purpose:

The purpose of these guidelines is to clarify Wisconsin State Statute 343, Subchapter VI "Licensing of Driver Schools and
Instructors," Wisconsin Administrative Transportation Code 105 "Licensing of Driver Training Schools and Instructors,"
and Wisconsin Department of Transportation Policy all of which regulate the licensing and operation of private driver
training schools.

These guidelines are intended to be used as a resource to assist owners in opening a driver training school and providing
guidance to both, owners and instructors in successfully operating and maintaining a driver training school in
accordance with the regulations listed above.

What is a Driver School?

A "Driver School" means a business that gives instruction, for compensation, in the operation of motor vehicles

                                   WI Stat 343.60(1)

Exceptions to a Driver School:

A driver school does not include any of the following:
    · A high school or technical college that teaches driver training as part of its regular school program and whose
         course of study in driver training meets the criteria for a driver education course and has been approved by the
         DPI or the TCSB.
    · An institution of higher learning that teaches driver training as part of its teacher-training program.
    · A motorcycle training school that offers a basic or experienced rider training course approved by the
         department.
    · Any driver training school that offers training exclusively in the operation of vehicles designed and manufactured
         for off-highway operation.

· An instructor.

                                   WI Stat 343.60(1) (a)-(e)

                                3
What is an Instructor:

"Instructor" means any person who is employed by a driver school licensed under this chapter (343.60) and who, for
compensation, gives instruction in the operation of a motor vehicle.

                                              WI Stat 343.60(3)

Common Abbreviations and Definitions:

BTW   Behind-The-Wheel
CLP   Commercial Learners Permit
DMV   Division of Motor Vehicles
DTS   Driver Training School
FEIN  Federal Employee Identification Number
SSN   Social Security Number
VIN   Vehicle Identification Number

Definitions/Common Abbreviations:

              Authorized Medical Practitioner ­ may consist of any of the following:
                   1. Physician licensed to practice medicine in any state
                   2. Advanced practice nurse licensed to practice nursing in any state
                   3. Physician assistant licensed or certified to practice in any state
                   4. A chiropractor licensed to practice chiropractic's in any state
                   5. Christian Science practitioner residing in this state and listed in the Christian Science Journal.
                                                                                                           WI Admin Code Trans 105.007(1)

              Bond
                   · Schools shall file a bond or acceptable alternative (MV3755) with the WisDOT based on size and
                        performance at original application and upon renewal. If a school is unable to meet its obligations as
                        stated in the contract/agreement the customer shall apply to the bond company. Points are assessed
                        based on frequency and severity as specified in WI Admin. Trans Code Trans 105.11. Certification of
                        the bond must be filed with the WisDOT at renewal of license.
                                                                                                                        WI Stat 343.61(3m) (b)
                                                                                                        WI Admin Code Trans 105.10(2)-(5)

              Customer
                   · An individual who is 18 years or older who is applying to or is enrolled at a Driver Training School for
                        instruction in driving a motor vehicle.

Driver School Point System
    · The WisDOT assesses points against a driver school or instructor that has violated any provision in
         the WI statutes 343.60 ­ 343.72 or any rules interpreting those statutes that constitute grounds for
         suspension or revocation of their license.
                                                                                                 WI Admin Code Trans 105.11

Fraudulent Practices
    · Fraudulent practices include, but are not limited to, any conduct or representation tending to give
         the impression that a license to operate a motor vehicle or any other license, registration or service
         granted by the secretary or WisDOT may be obtained by any means other than the means
         prescribed by law or by furnishing or obtaining the means by illegal or improper means; or
         requesting, accepting, exacting or collecting of money for such purpose.
                                                                                                      WI State 343.60(2) (a) (b)

                                       4
              Progressive Enforcement Actions
                   · A four-level process for enforcing regulations as specified in WI Stat 343.60 ­ 343.72 based on
                        assessed points against a driver school or instructor.
                                                                                                                             WI State 343.69(2)

              Driver School Office
                   · The location at which the driver school business is conducted and approved by the WisDOT. It does
                        not include any facility used only as a driver school classroom.
                                                                                                                            WI Stat 343.60(1m)

              Student
                   · An individual under 18 years of age who is applying to or is enrolled at a driver school for instruction
                        in driving a motor vehicle. Consider adding 17 year old obtaining CDL info
                                                                                                           WI Admin Code Trans 105.007(4)

              Substantiated
              o In reference to a complaint, substantiated means that the complaint is written, was submitted to the

                   school or instructor at issue, was not resolved within ten business days by the school or instructor, and
                   directly involves a matter regulated by WI Stat 343.62-343.75 or WI Admin Code Trans 105, with
                   probable cause to believe that violation occurred

                                                                                                           WI Admin Code Trans 105.007(5)
              Vehicle

                   · A 4-wheeled self-propelled device meeting federal motor vehicle safety standards with a minimum
                        of capacity of 4 persons.
                                                                                                           WI Admin Code Trans 105.007(6)

              Vehicle less than 3 years old (as defined by the WisDOT's Dept. of General Counsel)
                   · In determining if a vehicle is less than three years old, use the following guidelines: if a vehicle is a
                        2003 model year vehicle, it becomes 3 years old on December 31.

Additional Reference Material:

In addition to this guide, all owners and instructors must familiarize themselves with the following:
    · Wisconsin State Statues 343, Subchapter VI "Licensing of Driver Schools and Instructors"
    · Wisconsin Administrative Transportation Code 105 "Licensing of Driver Schools and Instructor
    · WisDOT website: CDL Instruction | Find A Driver Training School (arcgis.com)

                                                                         5
                     Chapter Two: Driver Training Schools

Requirements for Licensing Based on Type of Instruction:

Required for Driver School License          Under age 18         Adults Only  Truck Driver        Safety
                                                                                              Organization

                                                                                               (Failure to
                                                                                              Yield Right of

                                                                                                   Way)

Customer (student) Contract/Agreement       Yes                  Yes          Yes             Yes

Fee Schedule*                               Yes                  Yes          Yes             Yes

Customer (Student) Record Card (MV3767)     Yes                  Yes          Yes             No

Driver School Application and Fee (MV3110)  Yes                  Yes          Yes             Yes

Course Summary*                             Yes                  No           ELDT Compliant  Yes

Office Certification (MV3683)               Yes                  Yes          Yes             No

Driver Training School Classroom            Yes                  No           No              No

Certification (MV3684)                      (No for B-T-W only)

Driver Training Vehicle Record (MV3264)     Yes                  Yes          No              No

Insurance                                   Yes                  Yes          Yes             No

Bond                                        Yes                  Yes          Yes             Yes

Licensed Instructors (MV3112)               Yes                  Yes          Yes             No

*Form must be developed by the school and submitted to the WisDOT for approval. Standardized forms are not
                                                    available from the WisDOT

Contact Information

Class D, CDL and Safety Organizations

Driver Training Schools:

4822 Madison Yards Way
Madison WI 53707
608-264-7495
DotDrvrTrnSchool@dot.wi.gov

                                                 6
                       Chapter Three: Pre-Application

Conflict of Interest:

Screen applicants' current employment for possible conflict of interest.

See: Conflict of Interest Chart ­ Addendum B

                       Chapter Four: Completing the Application Process

Americans with Disability Act

As with any business, driver schools must meet federal standards to provide reasonable accommodations to persons
with disabilities. Driver training cars may be equipped with special equipment for customers/students with disabilities in
addition to the standard equipment requirements.

If needed to provide specialized services, non-standard vehicles will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.

For any questions regarding customers with disabilities, ACT (ADA) contact Great Lakes ADA and accessible IT Center at
1-800-949-4232 or visit www.adagreatlakes.org

Background Check

A background check will be completed by the WisDOT upon receipt of application materials prior to determination of
eligibility. Background checks will be conducted for each individual listed on the application including: owners, partners,
managers, associates, directors and instructors.

Background checks will be performed at initial application and during instructor and school renewals.
                                                                                                                        WI Stat 343.61(2m) (b)

                                                                                                               WI Admin Code Trans 105.035
See: Driver School owner(s)/manager(s) and instructor(s) background checking chart (ADDENDUM B)

Licensing Determination

Before mailing, check the application to make sure that:

         · All required sections of the application are accurately completed
         · All examination requirements have been completed
         · All required forms, records, course summary, insurance, certificate or bond or the bond alternative, and

              other supporting documents have been submitted for review.
         · Enclose a check or money order for all applicable fees payable to: Registration Fee Trust.
The length of time required for a determination is based on the completeness of the application. A determination of
eligibility for a driver school and/or a driver instructor license will be made within 5 business days once the application
materials are complete and accurate.

                                                                                                             WI Admin Code Trans 105.09(2)

                                              7
Licensing Denials

The department may not issue or renew a driver school license if any of the following applies:

                                                                                                WI Stat 343.61(2m)

· The applicant or licensee or any officer, director, partner or other person directly interested in or actively
    involved in the driver school business was a former holder of, or actively involved in a driver school business
    operating under, a license issued under this section or a similar license issued by another jurisdiction or was
    directly interested in or a party actively involved in another driver school which held a license under this section
    or a similar license issued by another jurisdiction or was the former holder of an instructor license issued under
    WI Stat 343.62, and any such license was revoked or suspended
                                                                                                                 WI Stat 343.61(2m)(a)

· The applicant or licensee or any officer, director, stockholder, partner or any person directly interested in or
    actively involved in the driver school business has been convicted of a felony, or any other disqualifying offense
    as established by rule by the department, in this state, or in another jurisdiction, including a conviction under
    the law of a federally recognized American Indian tribe or band in this state, for an offense that if committed
    in this state would be a felony or disqualifying offense, unless the person so convicted has been officially
    pardoned.
                                                                                                                 WI Stat 343.61(2m) (b)

· The applicant or licensee does not have a driver school office

                                                                                                WI Stat 343.61(2m) (c)

· The applicant or licensee is not the owner of the driver school

                                                                                                WI Stat 343.61(2m) (d)

· The applicant or licensee fails to provide a FEIN or SSN or a statement under oath that the individual does not
    have a SSN.
                                                                                                                 WI Stat 343.61(2m) (e)

· The applicant has made a material false statement or concealed a material fact in an application.
                                                                                                                 WI Stat 343.61(2m) (f)

· Failure to secure and/or maintain insurance and bond as required

                                                                    WI Admin Code Trans 105.10
                                                                        WI Stat 343.61(3m) (a) (b)

                  Chapter Five: Operating a Licensed Driver Training School

Records Entries

Within 3 business days of signing a contract/agreement between the school and the student, the following information
must be recorded in the Student Record:

    · Student's last name, first name, and middle initial;
    · Student's date of birth

                                                                         8
· Student's home address
· The contract or agreement number

                                       WI Admin Code Trans 105.05(2) (b)

Within 3 business days after the last instruction or other service has been received by the student, the total number of
hours of lessons, lectures, tutoring, and other instruction of services of any kind relating to motor vehicle operation
instructions must be recorded.

                                                                                                         WI Admin Code Trans 105.05(2) (c)

Range
It may be helpful for a driver school to record each customer's instruction permit number and expiration date as part of
the customer's school record.

Instructor is no Longer Employed with the Driver Training School

If an instructor is no longer employed with a driver school, the instructor shall surrender his or her license to the driver
school. The driver school shall destroy the instructor's license and notify the department in writing to cancel the license.

                                                                                                             WI Admin Code Trans 105.04(5)

Lesson Plans

Complete lesson plans are to be kept on file at the driver school office but not submitted to the department in lieu of
the Course Summary.

                                                                                                      WI Admin Code Trans 105.07(1) (b) 3

When preparing lesson plans, along with any other references, refer to the WI CDL Drivers Handbook for detailed
information as well as FMCSA'S TPR located at https://tpr.fmcsa.dot.gov/.

All licensees must ascertain from state license examiners the route over which road tests are given and no licensee may
instruct in those areas, except that driver schools may operate on a division of motor vehicle skills test route if
comparable training location opportunities are not otherwise available in the locale.

                                                                                                                              WI Stat 343.72(6)

Training Provider Registry (TPR)

No driver school may represent that completion of a course of instruction will guarantee that the student will pass
the driving skills test administered by the department. A driver school may only represent by means of a certificate
of completion that the student has satisfactorily completed the required course.

                                                                                                                          WI Stat 343.72(5m)

It is the responsibility of the driver training school to:
           · Enter in completions for students within the TPR for completion of the classroom, yard/range and road
                instruction when all required fees have been paid.
                                                                                                         WI Admin Code Trans 105.07(1) (c)

All Driver Education completions should be submitted via the TPR at Training Provider Registry (dot.gov).

                                    9
Driver School Point System

The department may assess points against a driver school that has violated any provision or rule that constitute grounds
for the suspension, revocation, or denial of their license. The department will evaluate the offense and shall send a
warning letter prior to an advisory letter. The school may respond within 10 days.

                                                                                                               WI Admin Code Trans 105.11

Points assessed against an instructor shall also be assessed against the driver training school.

See: Driver School and Instructor Point System Chart (ADDENDUM C)

Progressive Enforcement Actions

A process of enforcing regulations in WI Stat 343.60 ­ 343.72 and rules interpreting these statutes

The process is based on the total number of demerit points assessed within the past 24 months and consists of four
levels.

    · Level 1. An advisory letter may be sent to the driver school or instructor asking for corrective action.
    · Level 2. The department may conduct an on-site inspection or audit. An advisory letter shall be sent. If a

         situation is unresolved after time specified in the advisory letter, the Department may issue a conditional
         license under WI Stat 343.61 or 343.62 restricted to classroom instruction only. Vehicles used by the
         driver school may also be ordered out of service, if the violation is related to the vehicle inspection. The
         restricted license may remain in effect until the situation is resolved.
    · Level 3. A warning letter will be sent. The licenses may be revoked, suspended or denied for 90 days.
    · Level 4. The licenses shall be revoked, suspended, or denied for 4 months to one year, based on point
         accumulation.

                                                                                                               WI Admin Code Trans 105.12

See: Progressive Enforcement Actions (ADDENDUM D)

Complaints

Driver school customers, other interested parties may contact our office with substantiated complaints. In general, a
standard policy of resolving complaints fairly is followed.

                                                                                                                              WI Stat 343.69(2)

When contact is made with our office regarding a complaint against a driver training school or instructor, the complainant
will need to complete a Complaint Form for Driver Training Schools/Instructors (MV3756) detailing the nature of the
complaint and must provide evidence substantiating the claim. All complaints are to be submitted on the form.

When a written complaint is received, the department will notify the driver school involved in writing.
Any complaint against an instructor should be discussed with the school owner when it is received from the
department.

See: Progressive Enforcement Actions (ADDENDUM D)

Revocations ­ Suspensions ­ Cancellations ­ Denial of Renewal

 The department may suspend, revoke, or cancel any driver school license issued under WI Stat 343.61 or under
 WI Stat 343.62or subject to WI Stat 343.61 and 343.62, refuse to renew a driver school license if, during any period,
 any of the following applies:

    · The licensee has made a material false statement or concealed a material fact in connection with the application
         for a license or the renewal of a license.
                                                                                                                         WI Stat 343.66(1) (a)

                                                                        10
    · The licensee or any partner, member, manager, or officer of the licensee has been convicted of a felony, or
         any other disqualifying offense as established by rule by the department, in this state, or in any other
         jurisdiction, including a conviction under the law of a federally recognized American Indian tribe or band in this
         state, for an offense that if committed in this state would be a felony or disqualifying offense, unless the person
         so convicted has been officially pardoned.
                                                                                                                         WI Stat 343.66(1) (b)

    · The licensee has failed to comply with any of the requirements of WI Stat 343.60 ­ 343.72 or rules promulgated
         under those sections.
                                                                                                                          WI Stat 343.66(1) (c)

    · The licensee or any partner, member, manager or officer of the licensee has been guilty of fraud or fraudulent
         practices in relation to the business conducted under the license or in relation to securing for himself or herself
         or another a license to operate a motor vehicle, or guilty of inducing another person to resort to fraud or
         fraudulent practices in relation to securing for himself or herself or another the license to operate a motor vehicle.
                                                                                                                         WI Stat 343.66(1) (d)

    · The licensee has knowingly employed, as an instructor, a person who does not meet the requirements under WI
         Stat 343.62.
                                                                                                                         WI Stat 343.66(1) (e)

    · The licensee has failed to maintain insurance as required by the department under WI Stat 343.61(3m)(a)
                                                                                                                           WI Stat 343.66(1) (f)

The secretary shall deny, restrict, limit or suspend any driver school license issued under WI Stat 343.61 or under WI Stat
343.62or refuse to renew a driver school applicant or licensee is an individual who is delinquent in making court-ordered
payments of child or family support, maintenance, birth expenses, medical expenses or other expenses related to the
support of a child or former spouse, or who fails to comply, after appropriate notice, with a subpoena or warrant issued
by the Department of Workforce Development or a county child support agency under WI Stat 59.53(5) and related
to paternity or child support proceedings, as provided in a memorandum of understanding entered into under WI
Stat 49.857.

                                                                                                                             WI Stat 343.66(2)

The secretary shall suspend or revoke a driver school license issued under WI Stat 343.61 or an instructor's license
issued under WI Stat 343.62, if the Department of Revenue certifies under WI Stat 73.0301 that the licensee is
responsible for delinquent taxes. A licensee whose driver school license or instructor's license is suspended or revoked
for delinquent taxes is entitled to a notice under WI Stat 73.0301(2)(b)1. and a hearing under WI Stat 73.0301(5)(a) but
is not entitled to any other notice or hearing.

                                                                                                                             WI Stat 343.66(3)
If a driver's school or instructor's license is revoked, canceled, or suspended, the licensee shall surrender all driver school
and instructor licenses to the department and no portion of the license fee shall be refunded.

                                                                                                                             WI Stat 343.66(4)
See: Progressive Enforcement Actions (ADDENDUM D)

                                                                        11
                                 Chapter Six: Licensing Instructors

Requirements by Type of Instruction

No person, including a person holding a driver school license, may act as an instructor in a driver school unless the
person holds a valid instructor's license issued by the WisDOT. No driver school may employ any person as an instructor
unless the person holds a valid instructor's license issued by the WisDOT.

                                                                                                                              WI Stat 343.61(1)

Requirements                 Truck Driver
Application and Fee (MV3112                Yes
Section A)
Medical Certification                      Yes
(MV3112 Section B)
Tests (MV3112 Section D)

Knowledge Test(s)            Yes

Road Test                    Yes

Oral Test                    Yes

High Way Signs Test          Yes

Vision                       Yes

Hearing                      Yes

Conflict of interest

Applicants' current employment may cause a conflict of interest.

Instructors who move to another school must do the following:
     · Send in or destroy the old instructor license
     · Notify the Department.
     · Have the instructor license reissued to the new school by submitting a driver instructor application to the
          Department.

Instructors can work for an unlimited amount of driver training schools.

See: Conflict of Interest Chart (Addendum A)

Qualifications

Preliminary Qualifications
    · Be 20 years of age or older
    · Hold a valid, commercial driver license that is valid for the classes and endorsements in which the instructor will
         provide training.
    · Have 2 years of licensed commercial driving experience

                                                                        12
· Have a satisfactory driving record.                                                      WI Stat 343.62(4) (a) 3
· If ever licensed outside of Wisconsin, provide a driver record abstract from each state  WI Stat 343.62(4) (a) 8

A person's driving record shall not be considered satisfactory to hold an instructor's license if that person:
    · Has accumulated more than 6 demerit points during a 1-year period as determined by the department. The
         department shall deny the instructor's license until one-year lapses from the date of the most recent violation
         that resulted in the person's accumulation of more than 6 demerit points.
    · Has been involved in 2 or more accidents in a 1-year period where the crash report indicates that such person
         may have been causally negligent. If there is no traffic citation resulting in a conviction associated with the
         crash, the person is not considered negligent.
    · Has had his or her operator's license revoked, suspended or cancelled for a traffic violation other than a parking
         violation, at any time during the past 4 years, based on the conviction date or upon the effective date of the
         withdrawal of operating privileges, whichever is earlier.
                                                                                                             WI Admin Code Trans 105.03(1)

Qualifications
    · Applicants must be able to understand and respond to verbal commands and instructions in English by a skills
         test examiner. Neither the applicant nor the examiner may communicate in a language other than English during
         the skills test.
    · Must pass all required examinations: CDL instructor test, knowledge test(s), oral test, road test and medical
         exam. Proof of passing examinations must be submitted. For additional information see: Licensing Instructors ­
         examinations
    · Provide a social security number or an affidavit stating that the applicant does not have a social security number
                                                                                                                        WI Stat 343.62(4) (a) 6
    · Does not have a disqualifying conviction according to the Driver School Owner(s)/Manager(s) and Instructor(s)
         background checking chard (addendum H)
                                                                                                                        WI Stat 343.62(4) (a) 9
                                                                                                               WI Admin Code Trans 105.035

Completion of Application (MV3112)

A license that is issued by the department in reliance on a statement submitted is invalid if any statement is false.
                                                                                                                       WI Stat 343.62(2am) (b)

Fee ­ License

The fee for an instructor's license is $50 (24 months) and may be prorated if the license is issued for less than 24 months.
(The fee submitted on an original application will be $2/month from the month of application until the expiration of the
Driver School License.)

                                                                                                                     WI Stat 343.62(3) (a) 1, 2

Examinations for License

Tests are required of all applicants for original instructor's license and whose licenses have lapsed for one or more years.
                                                                                                            WI Admin Code Trans 105.02(1)

Required tests are dependent on the type of instruction being taught for Class A, B, or C license.
                                                                                                            WI Admin Code Trans 105.02(1)

If an applicant fails any test after 2 successive attempts, the applicant must wait 1 year from the date of the last test to
retest.

                                                                                                                       WI Stat 343.62(4) (a) 2
The department may require retesting of currently licensed instructors either as part of a routine retesting program or
when it has reasonable cause to doubt the continued competency of any individual instructor.

                                                                                                            WI Admin Code Trans 105.02(1)

                                                                        13
Knowledge Test(s)
This test may be taken at any DMV service center (no appointment necessary).
The test is designed to evaluate the applicant's knowledge of motor vehicle and traffic laws, safety equipment
requirements, and functions of essential automotive equipment. A passing score is 80%.

                                                                                                                       WI Stat 343.62(4) (a) 1
Oral Test
The applicant must describe to an examiner all safety equipment and essential automotive equipment in the vehicle. An
appointment is necessary and will be scheduled with the district headquarters office, after an applicant is approved. The
applicant has two attempts at this exam.

                                                                                                                        WI Stat 343.62(4) (a) 1
In the Wisconsin CDL Drivers Manual, you'll find information how to prepare to become a CDL Instructor. Below you'll
find pages and reference links to study for the CDL Oral and Skills Exam.
CDL Drivers Manual- https://wisconsindot.gov/Documents/dmv/shared/bds356-cdl-manual.pdf#
The Division of Motor Vehicle (DMV) and Driver Training and Records Unit (DTRU) encourages you study the sections on
page 8 of the CDL Drivers Manual for the type of training you wish to conduct.

                                                                        14
Note: If you wish to train students in a school bus, we suggest studying sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 10 and 5 if the vehicle is
equipped with air brakes. Reviewing these sections will provide you with the knowledge required to provide training for
the specific vehicle type.

Oral Exam Inspection- During the Oral Exam, the state examiner will provide you with the names of components you'll
inspect in the vehicle. You're required to point out the item, explain, and demonstrate the use or procedure for the
items. When you've completed the item, the examiner will evaluate your response and move on the next item on the
list. You're not allowed any reference material for this portion of the test as this is not the vehicle inspection test. To
prepare for the Oral Exam you should familiarize yourself with the vehicle you will bring to the test and study the
suggested information listed below.

CDL Driver's Manual-

    · Section 1: Introduction
    · Section 2.1.3 What to look for-Steering System-Emergency equipment
    · Section 2.1.5 Seven-step inspection method-Step 1 through 7
    · Section 2.2 Basic control of your vehicle- 2.2.1 through 2.2.3
    · Section 2.3 Shifting gears- Manual Transmission 2.3.1
    · Section 2.5.2 Communicating your presence
    · Section 2.16.4 Proper braking technique
    · Section 2.17.2 How to stop quickly and safely
    · Section 2.21.2 Fire prevention
    · Section 11M.1 Internal Inspection (All Vehicles)
    · Section 11M.1.1 ­ In-Vehicle/ Engine Start
    · 11M.1.2 ­ Air Brake or Hydraulic Brake Check (based on type of brake system)
    · Section 11M.2 Passenger and School Bus Only
    · Section 11M.3 School Bus Only
    · Section 11M.4 ­ Lights Operations Check (All Vehicles)

Note: This manual will help you prepare for the tests. This manual is not a substitute for a truck driver training class or
program. Formal training is the most reliable way to learn the many special skills required for safely driving a large
commercial vehicle and becoming a professional driver in the trucking industry.

Road Test
The road test must be completed in a vehicle similar to the one that will be used for instruction. An applicant may need
to take this test in multiple vehicles depending on the type of vehicle they will be using for training. Example: The
instructor will be training in Class A CMV and Passenger Bus, they would need to take a CDL Skills test in each vehicle type.
The applicant shall take the road test administered by the department. The road test shall be scored in the same
manner as tests given for the type of operator's licenses the applicant will instruct and shall also include an actual
demonstration of procedures and techniques used for instructing drivers. An appointment is necessary and will be
scheduled with the district headquarters office, after an applicant is approved.

                                                                                                                       WI Stat 343.62(4) (a) 2
                                                                                                            WI Admin Code Trans 105.02(1)

Medical Requirements

Medical Examination
An applicant for an instructor's license shall have a medical statement completed within the 24 months prior to the
application date by an authorized medical practitioner on a form supplied by the department (MV3112, section B). If

                                                                        15
the applicant has a medical condition that impacts safe operation, the department may request medical
documentation more frequently based on WI Admin Code Trans 112.

NOTE: Federal Medical certificates do not substitute the requirements found in section B of the MV3112 for instructors
who will be instructing in a class D vehicle.

                                                                                                            WI Admin Code Trans 105.02(4)

An authorized medical practitioner is any of the following licensed to practice in any state:
    · Physician licensed to practice medicine in any state
    · Advanced practice nurse licensed to practice nursing in any state
    · Physician assistant licensed or certified to practice in any state
    · A chiropractor licensed to practice chiropractic in any state
    · Christian Science practitioner residing in this state and listed in the Christian Science Journal

                                                                                                                         WI Stat 343.62(4) (a) 4
                                                                                                          WI Admin Code Trans 105.007(1)

A CDL training instructor is required to have a valid Federal Medical card, unless they are grandfathered or otherwise
exempt from the Federal Medical standards.

Vision and Hearing
    · Visual acuity requirements are 20/40 in either eye and at least 20/100 in the other eye
    · Field of vision must be 70% or more in both eyes
    · Color perception must be normal
    · Meet the depth perception standard of 20% stereopsis
    · Hearing must be adequate with or without hearing aid

Denials
License will be denied unless a complete application is received, all examinations (skills and medical) have been
successfully completed, satisfactory driving record and criminal background check.

Expiration

An instructor's license expires on the date stated on the license, but not later than 24 months after the date on which
the license is issued.

                                                                                                                        WI Stat 343.62(3) (a) 2

Renewal of License (MV3112)

Complete Sections A and B unless the license has expired for 1 or more years. An instructor's license must be renewed
every 24 months. Renewal requires a new Driver Instructor Application (MV3112) be completed and submitted with a
fee of $50 to the department. The driving school must also be renewed prior to the issuance of an instructor's license.

                                                                                                            WI Admin Code Trans 105.07(7)

Applicants whose license has expired for 1 year or more must complete all tests required for an original application.
                                                                                                            WI Admin Trans Code 105.02(1)

Applicants whose license has been expired for 4 or more years must meet and complete all the required tests and the
requirements as that of a new instructor.

                                                                                                             WI Admin Trans Code 105.07(6)

                                                                        16
Duplicate of Lost or Stolen License; Reissued License

Instructor needs to submit to the department application (MV3112) and fee of $5

                                                                                              WI Stat 343.62(3) (b)
                                                                                 WI Admin Code Trans 105.04(1)

Criminal Convictions

When determining the fitness of a person to hold an instructor license, the department shall consider all relevant
arrests and convictions and will make further examinations and checks as determined necessary.
The department will conduct background checks during the initial application and at every renewal to determine eligibility
for a license.

                                                                                                              WI Admin Code Trans 105.035
See: Driver School Owner(s)/Manager(s) and Instructor(s) Background Checking Chart (ADDENDUM B)

Audits

An authorized department representative may visit classroom sessions and ride in driver training cars during
instruction for the purpose of evaluating the teacher's preparation, knowledge of the subject matter, and teaching
ability, and determining if the approved course is being followed.

                                                                                                             WI Admin Code Trans 105.02(4)
                                                                                                            WI Admin Code Trans 105.06(10)

Demerit Point system

The department may assess points against an instructor that has violated any provision or rule that constitutes grounds
for the suspension, revocation, or denial of their license. The department will evaluate the offense and before recording
points, notify the instructor of the reason for the proposed action. The instructor may respond within 10 days from the
date of notification.

                                                                                                               WI Admin Code Trans 105.11

If points are assessed as the result of a complaint regarding an instructor, the demerit points will be issued to both the
instructor and the school.

                                                                                                        WI Admin Code Trans 105.12(1) (b)
See: Driver School and Instructor Point System Chart (ADDENDUM C)

Progressive Enforcement Actions

A process of enforcing regulations in WI Stat 343.60 ­ 343.72 and rules interpreting these statutes

See: Progressive Enforcement Actions (ADDENDUM D)

Suspensions and Revocations

 A person's driving record shall not be considered satisfactory to hold an instructor's license if that person:
    · Has accumulated more than 6 demerit points during a 1-year period, as determined by the department, the
         department shall suspend the instructor's license for a period of 1 year. The period of suspension shall be
         measured from the date that the department receives notice of the most recent conviction or date of withdrawal
         whichever is earlier.

    · Has been involved in 2 or more accidents in a 1-year period where the crash report indicates that such person
         may have been causally negligent. If there is no traffic citation resulting in a conviction associated with the
         crash, the person is not considered negligent.

17
    · Has h a d his or her operator's license revoked, suspended or cancelled for a traffic violation other than a parking
         violation, at any time during the past 4 years, based on the conviction date or upon the effective date of the
         withdrawal of operating privileges, whichever is earlier.

                                                                                                             WI Admin Code Trans 105.03(1)

Hearings and Appeals

If the department denies an application for original issuance or renewal of an instructor's license, or revokes, suspends,
cancels, or restricts any such license, the department shall notify the applicant or licensee in writing of the action by
sending notice of the action by registered or certified mail to the last known address of the licensee or applicant.
Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the department under this subsection may, within 10 days after the date
of receiving notice of the department's action, request review of the action by the division of hearings and appeals in
the Department of Administration under chapter 227.

This does not apply to denials, cancellations, restrictions, suspensions, or revocations of licensees due to delinquent
court-order payments or delinquent taxes

                                                                                                                              WI Stat 343.69(1)
                                                                                                             WI Admin Code Trans 105.09(3)

No Longer Employed by a School

If an instructor is no longer employed by a driver school, the instructor shall surrender his or her license to the driver
school. The driver school must destroy the instructor's license and notify the department in writing to cancel this
license.

                                                                                                             WI Admin Code Trans 105.04(5)

Changing Schools

If an instructor changes employment from one school to another, the instructor license must be surrendered to the
school who must notify the department. The instructor must submit a new Instructor Application (MV3112) based on
employment at a new school and pay the fee of $5.00 made payable to: Registration Fee Trust.

                                                                                                             WI Admin Code Trans 105.04(5)

                    Chapter Seven: Working with Students and Customers

Agreement

A driver school may not instruct any customer/student until a contract/agreement in a form approved by the
department has been completed and signed by all parties.

                                                                                                                        WI Stat 343.71(1m) (b)

Behavior

A student may be dismissed from the class for disruptive behavior.
The school may refuse to refund all or part of the fee if there is a statement to that effect in the contract/agreement.

It may be beneficial to clearly define the school's policy regarding behavior of students/customers.

Commercial Learners Permit (CLP)

To obtain a Commercial Learners Permit (CLP), you must be at least 18 years old and hold a valid Class D license. All CLP
applicants must provide:

                                                                        18
     · Completed (MV3001) application
     · Proof of identity
     · Proof of legal status in the U.S.
     · Completed form MV3230 (to certify your tier of operation)
     · Federal Medical Examiner Certificate (Fed Med card) if certifying tier 1 or tier 3
     · Fees

Applicants must successfully pass all knowledge tests for the Classes/Endorsements they want to operate.

Applicants must display a `Not Prohibited' status in the Drug and Alcohol Clearinghouse.

*Entry Level Driver Training (ELDT) must be completed prior to scheduling a CDL skills exam. ELDT includes theory and
behind-the-wheel (BTW) instruction at a training provider/training entity listed on the Federal Motor Carrier Training
Provider Registry.

The following CDL applicants are required to successfully complete (ELDT) prior to being eligible for required CDL skills
testing:

     · New CDL Applicants who haven't previously held a CDL (proof is required)
     · Drivers applying for Class Upgrades (Class B to Class A)
     · Drivers adding Passenger Endorsement (P)
     · Drivers adding School Bus Endorsement (S)

The following CDL applicants are required to successfully complete (ELDT) prior to being eligible for required CDL
knowledge testing:

     · Drivers adding Hazardous Materials Endorsement (H)

License Requirements

Commercial Driver's Manual is available in English and Spanish,
                          · English BDS356
                          · Spanish BDS264

Status of Driving Privileges

A student may not obtain a commercial learners permit if driving privileges are revoked, suspended or cancelled.

In some cases, the period of the suspension or revocation does not begin until after making an application for a
license or permit.
Taking a student / customer out for behind-the-wheel (public roadway) lessons without their instruction permit is
illegal.

If a problem driver status is suspected, the student may check driving status on the department's website:

                                                  · WI Interactive Driver License/ID Guide

Replacement of Instruction Permit

The original commercial learners permit (CLP) is valid for 180 days. A person can renew the permit for an
additional 180 days, or replace a lost or stolen permit, by completing a Driver License Application (MV3001) and paying
the required fee.

                                                                        19
                                        Addendums

                    Addendum A - Conflict of Interest Chart

USE THIS GUIDE TO DETERMINE IF THERE IS A CONFLICT OF INTEREST

                    MAKING APPLICATION FOR-CONFLICT OF INTEREST (YES OR NO)

CURRENTLY             3rd Party Tester     Traffic Safety  Basic Motorcycle      Driver Training
EMPLOYED            (Regulated by       School, Multiple      Rider (BRC),     School Owner or
BY                  Bureau of Field     Offender, Group                       Instructor - Class D,
                     Services (BFS)                        Experienced Rider  CMV - Truck, Class
STATE                                       Dynamics         Course (ERC),
PATROL
(Per State Patrol,                      (instruction       (instruction       M, (regulated by
always check
with employer)                          offered through    offered through    DOT)
Bureau of Field                          the Technical      the Technical
Services (BFS)
                                        Colleges and       Colleges and
Department of
Transportation      YES                 regulated by DOT) regulated by DOT)
(DOT), Division of
Motor Vehicles                          NO                 NO                 YES OWNER
(DMV)
HIGHSCHOOL                              (WI ADMIN CODE IF TEACH ONLY-         OR

TECHNICAL                               TRANS 106)         CANNOT ADMISTER INSTRUCTOR
COLLEGE
                                                           TESTS
COOPERATIVE
EDUCATIONAL                   YES                 NO                NO        YES OWNER
SERVICES AGENCY      (WI ADMIN          (WI ADMIN TRANS        (WI ADMIN            OR
(CESA)              TRANS CODE                             TRANS CODE 129)
3RD Party Tester                            CODE 106)                         INSTRUCTOR
(regulated by              115.03)
BFS)                                              NO                NO        YES OWNER
                              YES       (WI ADMIN TRANS        (WI ADMIN            OR
                    (WI ADMIN                              TRANS CODE 129)
                    TRANS CODE               CODE 106)                        INSTRUCTOR

                           115.03)

                    NO                  NO                 NO                     NO

                                        (WI ADMIN TRANS (WI ADMIN TRANS

                                        CODE 106)          CODE 129)

                    NO                  NO                 NO                     NO

                                        (WI ADMIN TRANS (WI ADMIN TRANS

                                        CODE 106)          CODE 129)

                    NO                  NO                 NO                     NO

                                        (WI ADMIN TRANS (WI ADMIN TRANS

                                        CODE 106)          CODE 129)

                    NA                  NO                 NO                 NO - Class D & M

                                                                              YES - CMV - Truck

                                        20
Addendum B - Driver School Owner(s)/Manager(s) and Instructor(s) Background Check Chart

    Statute                                   Convictions that Disqualify for Life
    940.01                                                                Description
    940.03
    940.05           1st degree intentional homicide
940.225(1) to        Felony murder
      (3m)           2nd degree intentional homicide
    940.305          Sexual assault
    940.31
    941.32           Taking hostages
    944.34           Kidnapping
    946.01           Administering dangerous or stupefying drug
    946.02           Keeping a place of position
    946.03           Treason
948.02 (1) and       Sabotage
                     Sedition
       (2)           Sexual assault of a child
    948.025
    948.03           Engaging in repeated acts of sexual assault of the same child
    948.04           Physical abuse of a child
    948.05           Causing mental harm to a child
    948.055          Sexual exploitation of a child
    948.06           Causing a child to view or listen to sexual activity
    948.07           Incest with a child
    948.075          Child enticement
    948.08           Use of a computer to facilitate a child sex crime
    948.098          Soliciting a child for prostitution
    948.10           Sexual assault of a student age 16 or older by a school instructional staff person
948.11(2)(a) or      Exposing genitals or pubic area to child
                     Exposing a child to harmful material or harmful descriptions or narrations
      (am)
    948.12           Possession of child pornography
   948.13(2)         Child sex offender working with children
    944.06           Incest
   940.22(2)         Sexual exploitation by a therapist

      Statute               Convictions within the Past 10 Years from Date of Application
      948.21                                                              Description
      948.23
      948.30         Abandonment of a child ­ neglecting a child
      948.35         Concealing death of a child (at birth)
     961.42(1)       Abduction of another's child, constructive custody
961.41(1)(1)(1()(j)  Solicitation of a child to commit a felony
961.41(1m)(a) to     Keep or maintain any place for drug use, manufacture, keeping or delivering
      (1m)(j)        Manufacture, Distribution or delivery of drugs
  961.41(4)(am)      Possession with intent to manufacture, distribute or deliver drugs
     961.455
      961.46         Distribution or delivery or attempt to deliver or distribute an imitation controlled substance
                     Using a child for illegal drug distribution or manufacturing
                     Distribution of controlled substances to persons under age 18

                     21
944.17            Sexual gratification
944.30            Prostitution
944.31            Patronizing prostitutes
944.32            Soliciting prostitutes
944.33            Pandering
944.21            Disarming a peace officer
943.201           Unauthorized use of individual's personal identifying information or documents
940.02            1st degree reckless homicide
940.06            2nd degree reckless homicide
940.09            Homicide by intoxicated use of vehicle or firearm
943.32            Robbery
948.09            Sexual intercourse with a child age 16 or older

    Statute                Convictions within the Past 5 Years from Date of Application
    944.15                                                             Description
    944.20
    944.21        Public fornication
    944.23        Lewd and lascivious behavior
    944.25        Obscene material or performance
   944.25(1)      Making lewd, obscene or indecent drawings
    941.26        Sending obscene or sexually explicit electronic messages
    941.28        Injury by intoxicated use of a vehicle
    941.29        Possession of machine guns or other weapons
    941.295       Possession of short-barreled shotgun or rifle
    941.296       Possession of firearm by felon
    941.298       Possession of electric weapon
    941.30        Use or possession of a handgun and an armor-piercing bullet during crime
    941.31        Firearm silencer
    941.325       Recklessly endangering safety
    943.02        Possession of explosives
    943.03        Placing foreign objects in edibles
    943.04        Arson of buildings, damage of property by explosives
    943.06        Arson of property other than buildings
    944.10        Arson with intent to defraud
    943.28        Molotov cocktails
    943.30        Burglary
94.38 (1) or (2)  Loan sharking
    946.415       Threats to injure or accuse of crime
    946.43        Forgery
    946.44        Failure to comply with officer's attempt to take a person into custody
    946.47        Assaults by prisoners
    946.48        Assisting or permitting escape
    946.60        Harboring or aiding felons
    946.65        Kidnapped or missing persons; false information
    947.015       Destruction of documents subject to subpoena
  961.41 (1n)     Obstructing justice
961.41 (3g)(f)    Bomb scare
  961.41 (1x)     Possession of piperdine
                  Possession ­ gamma-hydroxybutyric acid, gamma-butyrolactone, ketamine or flunitrazepam
                  Conspiracy

                                                                22
 961.41 (2)(a) to    Counterfeit substances
        (d)
                     Possession of controlled substance
    961.41(3g)       Acquiring or obtaining passion of controlled substance by fraud or forgery ­ counterfeit substance
  961.43 (1)(2)      or packaging
                     Possession or disposal of waste from manufacture of methamphetamine
      961.67         Homicide by negligent operation of a vehicle
      940.10         Battery, substantial battery or aggravated battery
940.19(2), (4), (5)
       or (6)        Batter to a pregnant woman or unborn child
     940.195         Mayhem
      940.21         Criminal gang member solicitation and contact
      941.38         Reckless injury
      940.23         Abuse of vulnerable adults
     940.285         Abuse and neglect of patients and residents
     940.295         Contributing to the delinquency of a minor
      948.40         Leaving or storing a loaded firearm within reach or easy access of a child
      948.55         Possession of a firearm in a school zone
     948.605

    Statute                 Convictions within the Past 2 Years from Date of Application
940.12                                                                 Description
941.01
941.20          Assisting suicide
941.37          Negligent operation of a motor vehicle
943.07          Endangering safety by use of a dangerous weapon
941.11          Obstructing emergency or rescue personnel
                Criminal damage to railroads
                Unsafe burning of a building

                     Addendum C - Driver School and Instructor Point System Chart

WI STATE STATUTE 343.60 - 343.72, WI ADMIN TRANS RULE 105.11

The Department may assess points against a driver school or instructor that has violated any provision or rule that
constitute grounds for the suspension, revocation, or denial of their license. The Department will evaluate the
offense and may send a warning letter prior to an advisory letter. The school or instructor must respond within 10
days.

Points Offense                                   Consequence
                                                 The licenses issued shall be revoked, suspended or
6  Having one's school or instructor's           denied for 4 months to one year, based on point
                                                 accumulation.
   license withdrawn.                            The licenses issued shall be revoked, suspended or denied for
                                                 4 months to one year, based on point accumulation
6  Having 6 or more substantiated customer       The licenses issued shall be revoked, suspended, or denied
                                                 for 4 months to one year based on point accumulation
   complaints within a license period (2 years)

6  Providing documentation or information to

   the department on any matter regulated by

   subchapter VI of Chapter 343 or Trans 105

                                                 23
   which contains a false statement as to any

   material matter

6  Permitting actions that could harm the      The licenses issued shall be revoked, suspended or

   customer physically or financially          denied for 4 months to one year, based on point

                                               accumulation.

6  Performing work duties after consuming any The licenses issued shall be revoked, suspended or

   alcohol, controlled substance or any other denied for 4 months to one year, based on point

   drug that impairs ability to drive a motor  accumulation.

   vehicle

6  Failing to comply with DMV warning letter The licenses issued shall be revoked, suspended or

                                               denied for 4 months to one year, based on point

                                               accumulation.

6  Substantiated complaint from a parent, legal The licenses issued shall be revoked, suspended or

   guardian, customer of inappropriate conduct denied for 4 months to one year, based on point

   or actions with the customer                accumulation.

6  Violating ss. 343.60 to 343.72 that         The licenses issued shall be revoked, suspended or

   significantly harm highway safety           denied for 4 months to one year, based on point

                                               accumulation.

6  Instructing at a driver training school without The licenses issued shall be revoked, suspended or

   the proper license                          denied for 4 months to one year, based on point

                                               accumulation.

4  Not complying with renewal criteria within A warning letter will be sent. The licenses issued shall be

   30 days of written request by DMV           revoked, suspended or denied for 90 days.

4  Having 5 substantiated customer complaints A warning letter will be sent. The licenses issued shall be

                                               revoked, suspended or denied for 90 days.

4  Continuing to use a vehicle that is out of  A warning letter will be sent. The licenses issued shall be

   service for driver training                 revoked, suspended or denied for 90 days.

4  Have not filed school insurance and/or bond A warning letter will be sent. The licenses issued shall be

   with the department                         revoked, suspended or denied for 90 days.

4  Failing to resolve audit violations or      A warning letter will be sent. The licenses issued shall be

   discrepancies in the time specified         revoked, suspended or denied for 90 days.

4  Filing complaints about another school that A warning letter will be sent. The licenses issued shall be

   are not substantiated                       revoked, suspended or denied for 90 days.

4  Insolvency or bankruptcy                    A warning letter will be sent. The licenses issued shall be

                                               revoked, suspended or denied for 90 days.

4  Failing to timely pay debts owed to the state A warning letter will be sent. The licenses issued shall be

                                               revoked, suspended or denied for 90 days.

4  Violating 343.60 to 343.72, stats., that result A warning letter will be sent. The licenses issued shall be

   in unfair advantage to a school or harm     revoked, suspended or denied for 90 days.

   another school

2  Having 4 substantiated customer complaints The department may conduct an on-site inspection/audit.

   within the license period                   Letter will be sent. If situation is unresolved the

                                               department may issue a conditional license, restricting

                                               only classroom instruction.

2  Not filing required vehicle inspections with The department may conduct an on-site inspection/audit.

   the department                              Letter will be sent. If situation is unresolved the

                                               department may issue a conditional license, restricting

                                               only classroom instruction.

2  Not notifying the department when students The department may conduct an on-site inspection/audit.

   are no longer enrolled                      Letter will be sent. If situation is unresolved the

                                               24
                                          department may issue a conditional license, restricting

                                          only classroom instruction.

2  Having a significant discrepancy in business The department may conduct an on-site inspection/audit.

   records                                Letter will be sent. If situation is unresolved the

                                          department may issue a conditional license, restricting

                                          only classroom instruction.

2  Violation of 343.60 to 343.72, stats., that do The department may conduct an on-site inspection/audit.

   not harm the customer or impact highway Letter will be sent. If situation is unresolved the

   safety                                 department may issue a conditional license, restricting

                                          only classroom instruction.

2  Three substantiated customer complaints An advisory letter will be sent to driving school/instructor

   within a license period                asking for corrective action.

1  Violation of 343.61(4)(d), Stats., relating to An advisory letter will be sent to driving school/instructor

   office location and facility location  asking for corrective action.

1

Note: All administrative licensing suspensions, revocations, denials or conditional licenses issued may be
appealed under Chapter 227statutes.

                                Addendum D - Progressive Enforcement Actions

Before recording points, the department shall notify the school or instructor of the reason for proposed action. The
school or instructor may respond within 10 days. Upon due consideration the department shall act and may do the
following:

    · Record points assessed to driver school under Trans 105.11
    · Record points assessed to instructors, including points assessed by a driver school the instructor has worked for

         or owned previously. Points assessed to instructor may also be assessed to a school
    · Issue a conditional license when appropriate
    · Record less than the assessed points
Then, based on the points assessed to the driver school(s) and or instructor(s) under Trans 105.11 in the past 24
months, the following enforcement actions shall apply:

    · Level one enforcement action ­ one point assessed
              o An advisory letter may be sent to the driving school or instructor, asking for corrective action

    · Level two enforcement action ­ 1-3 points assessed
              o The department may conduct an on-site inspection/audit
              o An advisory letter shall be sent
              o If situation is not resolved in 10 days, the department may issue a conditional license under ss. 343.61 or
                   343.62, restricting to classroom instruction only
              o Vehicle may be ordered out of service if violation is related to the vehicle inspection
              o The restricted license will remain in effect until situation is resolved

    · Level three enforcement action ­ 4 -5 points assessed
              o A warning letter will be sent

                                                                        25
              o Licenses issued under ss. 343.61 or 343.62 shall be revoked, suspended or denied for 90 days.
    · Level four enforcement action ­ 6 or more points

              o The license issued under ss. 343.61 or 343.62 shall be revoked, suspended or denied for 4 months to 1
                   year based on point accumulation.

      Interpreting Driving Records for the Purpose of Determining Eligibility

Driving Schools should screen applicants for Instructor Licenses to ensure that they have a satisfactory driving
record as required by WI Stats 343.62(4)(a)8. and defined by WI Admin Code Trans 105.03
An Instructor is not eligible for an instructor license if the instructor has:

    1) Accumulated more than 6 demerit points in a one-year period, measured from the dates of the violations
         which resulted in the accumulation of demerit points, in the year preceding application, the department
         shall deny the instructor's license until one- y e a r elapses from the date of the most recent violation that
         resulted in the person's accumulation of more than 6 demerit points.

    2) Been involved in 2 or more accidents in a one-year period where the crash report indicates that such person
         may have been causally negligent (if there is no traffic citation resulting in a conviction associated with the
         crash, the person is not considered negligent.) The department shall deny the instructor's license until one-
         y e a r elapses from the date of the most recent accident where the crash report indicates that such person
         may have been causally negligent.
                   3) Had his or her operator's license revoked, suspended or cancelled for a traffic violation other than
                   a parking violation, at any time during the past 4 years, based on the conviction date or upon the
                   effective date of the withdrawal of operating privileges, whichever is earlier. In this case the
                   department will deny the instructor's license until 4 years has passed since the reinstatement from
                   the last affected withdrawal.

                                                                        26
