WISCONSIN
Commercial Driver's
Manual
May 2026
wisconsindot.gov
CONTENTS
Everyday Heroes Needed
Human trafficking is modern-day slavery,where traffickers use force,fraud and coercion
to control their victims.It can occur in many locations,including truck stops,hotels,
restaurants,rest areas,brothels,strip clubs,private homes,etc.
Any minor engaged in commercial sex is a victim of human trafficking.
Because professional drivers often find themselves
in locations frequented and exploited by human
traffickers, they're in a unique position to recognize
the signs of human trafficking and make the call that
can lead to victim recovery and perpetrator arrests.
Order wallet card:
Truckers Against Trafficking (TAT) has been working with
members of the transportation industry since 2009 to
provide the needed training and tools to enable members
of these key industries to both recognize and report human
trafficking when they see it happening. TAT has wallet cards
with red flags to look for, questions to ask if you suspect
someone is a victim and actionable information to report.
This wallet card is available by app, from the appropriate
app store, or by emailing info@truckersagainsttrafficking.org
TAT also provides a powerful, 26-minute video on its
website (www.truckersagainsttrafficking.org), with, when
watched along with taking and passing a short test,
certifies drivers as TAT-Trained, a designation which can
go on your resume.
Women and youth
are forced
into prostitution
along our nation's
highways.
You can help.
Scan this
QR code to
download on
Apple devices
Scan this
QR code to
download on
Android devices
Make the Call,Save Lives.
Call 911 to report human trafficking!
For victim services call the national hotline:
1-888-373-7888 (US)
1-833-900-1010 (Canada)
www.truckersagainsttrafficking.org
COVER 2 CONTENTS
CONTENTS
PRELIMINARY INFORMATION 6
Entry Level Driver Training (ELDT)
requirements 6
What is an Entry Level Driver
Training provider and where can I find
one? 6
Are any drivers exempt from Entry
Level Driver Training requirements? 6
Wisconsin information 7
Federal information 7
What should I study in this manual? 8
What CDL do I need? 9
What are the CMV classifications? 9
Who is exempt from CDL licensing in
Wisconsin? 12
What are endorsements? 13
What is a CDL restriction? 13
Social Security number requirement 14
Proof of U.S. citizenship or legal status
requirement 14
What is interstate commerce? 14
What is intrastate commerce? 14
Commercial Learner Permit (CLP) 15
Skills testing 15
School bus "S" endorsement 16
Hazardous materials "H" endorsement 17
Farm service CDL 18
Commercial driver license medical
requirements 19
Who was grandfathered from federal
medical standards? 20
Who is exempt from federal medical
standards? 20
Federal medical standards frequently
asked questions 21
Warnings and penalties 23
Identifying human trafficking 24
PART ONE 26
SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION 26
1.1 Commercial driver license tests 26
1.2 Medical documentation
requirements 28
1.3 CDL disqualifications 30
1.4 Other CDL rules 30
1.5 International Registration Plan
(IRP) and International Fuel Tax
Agreement (IFTA) 31
SECTION 2: DRIVING SAFELY 32
2.1 Vehicle inspection 32
2.2 Basic control of your vehicle 42
2.3 Shifting gears 44
2.4 Seeing 46
2.5 Communicating 48
2.6 Controlling speed 51
2.7 Managing space 54
2.8 Seeing hazards 61
2.9 Distracted driving 66
2.10 Aggressive drivers/road rage 69
2.11 Night driving and driver fatigue 71
2.12 Driving in fog 75
2.13 Driving in winter 75
2.14 Driving in very hot weather 78
2.15 Railroad­highway crossings 79
2.16 Mountain driving 82
2.17 Driving emergencies 84
2.18 Antilock braking systems (ABS) 87
2.19 Skid control and recovery 89
2.20 Crash procedures 91
2.21 Fires 92
2.22 Alcohol, other drugs and driving 94
2.23 Hazardous materials rules for all
commercial drivers 95
COVER 3 CONTENTS
SECTION 3: TRANSPORTING CARGO
SAFELY 98
3.1 Inspecting cargo 98
3.2 Weight and balance 98
3.3 Securing cargo 100
3.4 Cargo needing special attention 101
PART TWO 102
SECTION 4: TRANSPORTING
PASSENGERS SAFELY 102
4.1 Vehicle inspection 102
4.2 Loading and trip start 103
4.3 On the road 105
4.4 After-trip vehicle inspection 106
4.5 Prohibited practices 106
4.6 Use of brake-door interlocks 106
SECTION 5: AIR BRAKES 107
5.1 The parts of an air brake system 107
5.2 Dual air brakes 113
5.3 Inspecting air brake systems 113
5.4 Using air brakes 116
SECTION 6: COMBINATION
VEHICLES 120
6.1 Driving combination vehicles safely 120
6.2 Combination vehicle air brakes 124
6.3 Antilock brake systems 127
6.4 Coupling and uncoupling 128
6.5 Inspecting a combination vehicle 136
SECTION 7: DOUBLES AND TRIPLES 139
7.1 Pulling double/triple trailers 139
7.2 Coupling and uncoupling 140
7.3 Inspecting doubles and triples 142
7.4 Doubles/triples air brake check 143
SECTION 8: TANK VEHICLES 145
8.1 Inspecting tank vehicles 145
8.2 Driving tank vehicles 145
8.3 Safe driving rules 147
SECTION 9: HAZARDOUS
MATERIALS 149
9.1 The intent of the regulations 150
9.2 Hazardous materials
transportation­Who does what 151
9.3 Communication rules 152
9.4 Loading and unloading 163
9.5 Bulk packaging marking, loading
and unloading 166
9.6 Driving and parking rules 168
9.7 Hazardous materials­emergencies 170
9.8 Hazardous materials glossary 176
SECTION 10: SCHOOL BUSES 180
Wisconsin license requirements 180
General school bus rules 181
10.1 Danger zones and use of mirrors 181
10.2 Loading and unloading 184
10.3 Emergency exit and evacuation 190
10.4 Railroad-highway crossings 193
10.5 Student management 196
10.6 Antilock braking systems 197
10.7 Special safety considerations 198
Vehicle inspection for school bus 200
COVER 4 CONTENTS
PART THREE 201
SECTION 11M: VEHICLE INSPECTION
TEST 201
11M.1 Internal Inspection
(All Vehicles) 202
11M.2 Passenger and School Bus Only 206
11M.3 School Bus Only 207
11M.4 Lights Operations Check
(All Vehicles) 208
11M.5 External Inspection
(All Vehicles) 208
11M.6 Combination Vehicles 213
Class A Checklist 217
Class B or Class C Checklist 218
Class B or Class C Checklist 219
SECTION 12M: BASIC CONTROL
SKILLS TEST 220
12M.1 Scoring 220
12M.2 Exercises 222
SECTION 13: ON ROAD DRIVING
TEST 227
13.1 How you will be tested 227
This material is based upon work supported by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration under grant
funding. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of
the Author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration.
COPYRIGHT © 2025 AAMVA. All rights reserved.
This material has been created for and provided to State Driver License Agencies (SDLAs) by the American Association of Motor
Vehicle Administrators (AAMVA) solely for the purpose of educating and informing Driver License applicants (Commercial or Non-
Commercial). It does not contemplate every possible situation a driver may encounter, nor is intended to be used for purposes other than
those described above. Permission to reproduce, use, distribute or sell this material has been granted to SDLAs only. No part of this book
may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system without express written permission from the author/publisher. Any unauthorized reprint, use,
distribution, or sale of this material is prohibited.
COVER 5 CONTENTS
PRELIMINARY
INFORMATION
Entry Level Driver Training
(ELDT) requirements
Beginning February 7, 2022 the following
applicants are required to successfully
complete Entry Level Driver Training
(ELDT) prior to being eligible for
commercial driver license (CDL) skills
testing. Entry Level Driver Training includes
theory and behind-the-wheel instruction
at a training provider listed on the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration
(FMCSA) Training Provider Registry.
· Drivers applying for Class Upgrades
(Class B to Class A)
· Drivers adding Hazardous Materials
Endorsement (H)
· Drivers adding Passenger
Endorsement (P)
· Drivers adding School Bus
Endorsement (S)
What is an Entry Level
Driver Training provider
and where can I find one?
Entry Level Driver Training providers
include, but are not limited to, training
schools, educational institutions, rural
electric cooperatives, motor carriers, State/
local governments, school districts, joint
labor management programs, owner-
operators and individuals. Most employers
who train their own employees will be part
of the program. Please check with your
employer or contact a registered training
provider on the FMCSA Training Provider
Registry at https://tpr.fmcsa.dot.gov.
Are any drivers exempt
from Entry Level Driver
Training requirements?
1. Drivers excepted from the commercial
driver license (CDL) requirements
under 49 CFR §383.3(c), (d) and (h):
a. 383(c)­Exception for
certain military drivers.
b. 383(d)­Exception for farmers,
firefighters, emergency response
vehicle drivers and drivers
removing snow and ice.
c. 383(h)­Exception for drivers
of covered farm vehicles.
d. 383(e)­Restricted CDL for certain
drivers in the State of Alaska.
e. 383(f)­Restricted CDL
for certain drivers in farm-
related service industries.
f. 383(g)­Restricted CDL for certain
drivers in the pyrotechnic industry.
g. Drivers skills testing to remove
an Air Brake Restriction
h. Drivers skills testing to remove an
Automatic Transmission Restriction
2. Drivers issued a Class A CDL,
Class B CDL, or a passenger (P),
school bus (S), or hazardous
materials (H) endorsement
before February 7, 2022.
3. Individuals who obtain a Commercial
Learner Permit (CLP) before
February 7, 2022 are not required
to comply with this regulation if
they obtain a CDL before their
CLP or renewed CLP expires.
COVER 6 CONTENTS
Wisconsin information
Visit wisconsindmv.gov for:
· CDL An Overview
· CDL How to Apply
· CDL Vehicle Inspection and Road Tests
· Change Your Mailing Address
· Commercial Driving Schools
· Disqualifications
· DMV Online Services
· Endorsements
· Federal Medical Certificate (Fed Med)
and Your CDL
· Find an Authorized Third Party
Examiner for Your CDL Skills Test
· Hazardous Materials
· Medical Requirements for CDL
· Motor Carriers and Trucking
· Oversize/Overweight Permits
· and more at wisconsindmv.gov
DMV General Telephone
(608) 264-7447
Wisconsin State Patrol office locations and
contacts
Federal information
Visit the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration (FMCSA) at
www.fmcsa.dot.gov/ for:
· Cargo Securement Rules
· Driver Medical Exemption Programs
· Federal Regulations, Rules and Notices
· Frequently Asked Questions about Driver
Medical Requirements
· Find a Certified Medical Examiner
· FMCSA Registration Process
· HAZMAT Information
· Hours of Service
· Medical Examiner's Certificate (FedMed
Card)
· Medical Requirements for Drivers
· Safety Resources
· Training Provider Registry
· Veteran Drivers
· and more at www.fmcsa.dot.gov!
COVER 7 CONTENTS
What should I study
in this manual?
For a CDL to drive the following type of
vehicle, study:
Section 1: Introduction
Section 2: Driving Safely
Section 3: Cargo
Section 5: Air Brakes
Section 6: Combination Vehicles
Section 7: Doubles and Triples
Section 9: Haz Mat (if needed)
For a CDL to drive the following type of
vehicle, study:
Section 1: Introduction
Section 2: Driving Safely
Section 3: Cargo
Section 5: Air Brakes
Section 6: Combination Vehicles
Section 9: Haz Mat (if needed)
For a CDL to drive the following type of
vehicle, study:
Section 1: Introduction
Section 2: Driving Safely
Section 3: Cargo
Section 4: Passengers
Section 5: Air Brakes (if needed)
Section 10: School Bus
For a CDL to drive the following type of
vehicle, study:
Section 1: Introduction
Section 2: Driving Safely
Section 3: Cargo
Section 5: Air Brakes
Section 6: Combination Vehicles (if needed)
Section 9: Haz Mat (if needed)
CDL is required when the following vehicles
transport hazardous materials. In that case,
study:
Section 1: Introduction
Section 2: Driving Safely
Section 3: Transporting Cargo Safely
Section 9: Haz Mat
Study Section 8 if you want a tank vehicle
endorsement.
COVER 8 CONTENTS
What CDL do I need?
The commercial driver license (CDL) you
need depends on the class of commercial
motor vehicle (CMV) you plan to drive. To
determine the class of CMV, use the greater
of the:
· Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR), or
· actual gross weight, or
· registered weight, or
· Gross Combination Weight Rating
(GCWR) when the towed unit has a
GVWR, registered weight or actual gross
weight of over 10,000 pounds.
What are the CMV
classifications?
CLASS A Combination vehicle with a
Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR),
actual gross weight or registered weight of
over 26,000 pounds, inclusive of a towed
unit(s) with a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating
(GVWR), actual gross weight or registered
weight of over 10,000 pounds.
CLASS B Heavy straight vehicle with
a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR),
actual gross weight or registered weight of
over 26,000 pounds.
CLASS C­Small vehicle with a Gross
Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR), actual
gross weight or registered weight of 26,000
pounds or less that either:
· is designed to carry 16 or more persons
including the driver
· is of any size and is used in the
transportation of hazardous materials as
defined by 49 CFR 383.5.
You must have a valid CDL to operate a
commercial motor vehicle.
­
­
COVER 9 CONTENTS
Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) ­ weight of single vehicle
Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR) ­ weight of combined vehicles
Is the vehicle designed
to transport 16 or
more passengers
including the driver?
Class "A"
(combination weight
must be 26,001
pounds or more)
Class "B"
No CDL required
Class "C"
YES
YES
Class "C"
YES
NO NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
Is the vehicle
transporting hazardous
materials in a
placardable quantity?
Is the power
unit's GVWR
26,001 pounds
or more?
Is the trailer's
GVWR 10,001
pounds or more?
Class "A"
YES YES
YES
Is the GCWR
26,001 pounds
or more?
Is the trailer's
GVWR 10,001
pounds or more?
GVWR (Power Unit) + GVWR (Trailer) = GCWR
Flow Chart to Determine CDL Class Needed
COVER 10 CONTENTS
Vehicle Examples of CMV classifications
Tractor
Or
Single
Unit
Truck
Trailer Carries
Hazmat
Is Designed
To Transport
16 Or More
Passengers
Including
The Driver
School
Bus
Do I
Need A
CDL?
What
Class?
Which
Endorsement?
1 18,000# 12,000# X Yes A H
2 8,000# 20,000# Yes A
3 26,500# Yes B
4 27,000# 10,000# Yes B
5 27,000# X X Yes B P and S
6 29,000# X Yes B P
7 12,000# X Yes C H
8 25,000# X Yes C P
9 25,000# X X Yes C P and S
10 5,000# X Yes C H
11 16,000# 10,000# No D
12 26,000# 8,000# No D
13 10,000# X No D S
14 6,000# 20,000# No D
Tank Truck
15 26,000# No D
16 26,010# Yes B N
17 26,000# 10,000# No D
18 26,000# 10,000# X Yes C H­N
19 20,000# 10,500# Yes A N
COVER 11 CONTENTS
Who is exempt from CDL
licensing in Wisconsin?
Federal law allows States the option to
waive certain kinds of drivers from the
requirement to obtain a CDL. In Wisconsin,
the following drivers are not required to
hold a CDL:
· Firefighters and rescue squad
members are not required to hold
a CDL to drive properly equipped
emergency or fire fighting vehicles.
However, you may be required to obtain
a CDL if you have a Wisconsin driver
license and operate a fire fighting vehicle
in another State.
· Recreational vehicle operators
(owned or leased motor home, fifth
wheel mobile home or touring mobile
home, provided it isn't longer than 45
feet) not engaged in commercial activity
are not required to hold a CDL.
· A farmer, the farmer's family
members, and/or the farmer's
employees are not required to hold a
CDL to drive a commercial motor vehicle
owned or leased by the farmer, provided
the vehicle is not used in `for hire'
carriage, is transporting farm supplies,
produce or machinery to or from the
farm and is within 150 miles of a farm in
Wisconsin, Minnesota or Iowa. The farm
supplies that a farmer may transport
without obtaining a CDL may include
hazardous materials. However, a farmer
driving a commercial motor vehicle with
double or triple trailers or designed to
carry or actually carrying 16 or more
passengers must have a CDL with proper
endorsements.
· Back-up (substitute or replacement)
snowplow drivers (includes snow
or ice removal by plowing, salting or
sanding) for local units of government
(defined as a county, city, village, town,
school district, county utility district,
sanitary district, metropolitan sewage
district, or other public body created
by or pursuant to state law) are not
required to hold a CDL if they meet all of
the following:
 Are an employee of a local unit of
government with a population of
3,000 or less.
 Hold a valid Class D license.
 Are operating within the boundaries
of the local unit of government
 Is one of the following:
» Substituting for or replacing, a
regular employee who ordinarily
operates the vehicle.
» An additional employee because
a snow emergency exists as
determined by the local unit of
government.
COVER 12 CONTENTS
What are endorsements?
Wisconsin issues endorsements for specific types of operation. Endorsements require
additional knowledge testing. Some endorsements require skills tests, proof of meeting
medical standards or a background check. An endorsement is evidence that you have passed
the tests and have the information you need for special operation. You must pass tests and
receive an endorsement to operate a:
S School bus
P Passenger vehicle: designed to transport or actually transporting 16 or more
passengers including the driver
H Hazardous materials
N Tank vehicles: commercial vehicles equipped with a cargo tank
T Double or triple trailers: towing double or triple trailers
F Farm service: restricted to farm service operation
Endorsement Requirements
S
School Bus
P
Passenger
H
HAZMAT
N
Tanker
T
Doubles &
Triples
F
Farm
Service
Knowledge
Test Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Skills Test Yes Yes -- -- -- --
Background
Check Yes -- Yes -- -- --
Finger-
printing
Only if
resident of
other state in
previous
2 years
-- Yes -- -- --
Medical
Every 2 years
until 70;
1 year after 70
Yes, applicant
self certifies -- -- -- --
What is a CDL restriction?
A restriction is a limitation on your CDL. If
you want to drive a vehicle with air brakes,
for example, you must pass a knowledge
test on air brake systems. You must also
pass a skills test in a vehicle equipped with
air brakes. If you choose not to take the
air brake tests, you will have a commercial
license restriction of "No air brake equipped
CMV." With this restriction on your CDL,
you may not legally operate a commercial
vehicle with air brakes.
­
­
­
­
­
­
COVER 13 CONTENTS
CDL restrictions are:
K­CDL intrastate only
51­CDL intrastate only in excepted
industry
V­CMV medical variance required
L No air brake equipped CMV
Z No full airbrake equipped CMV (Skills
test was taken in vehicle with partial air
brakes.)
E­No manual transmission equipped CMV
(Skills test was taken in an automatic
transmission vehicle.)
O No tractor/trailer CMV (Skills test
was not taken in a tractor-trailer
combination.)
M­No Class A passenger vehicle
N­No Class A/B passenger vehicle
X­No cargo in CMV tank vehicle
To lift restrictions Z, E, O, N, or to add
an S or P endorsement you must hold a
Commercial Learner Permit for at least 14
days before taking a skills test.
Social Security number
requirement
Applicants for a commercial driver license
are required to provide their Social Security
number. The Social Security number will
not appear on the driver license document
but will be used to identify driver records
between States.
Proof of U.S. citizenship or
legal status requirement
Commercial drivers must present proof
of legal status upon original (first time)
issuance of their CDL, renewal, when
transferring an out-of-state CDL or when
adding or removing a class, endorsement
or restriction. See the list of acceptable
documents to prove U.S. citizenship or legal
status at wisconsindmv.gov/DL-docs.
Under federal law effective March 1, 2015
temporary visitors from Canada and Mexico
may no longer renew or change classes or
endorsements on their Wisconsin CDL.
If you are a temporary visitor from Canada
or Mexico and wish to continue driving a
commercial vehicle in the U.S., you must
obtain a qualifying commercial driver
license from Canada or Mexico before your
current Wisconsin CDL expires.
What is interstate commerce?
Interstate commerce is any trade, traffic or
transportation in the U.S. between a place
in a State and a place outside of such State
OR is between two places in a State through
another State or place outside of the U.S.
NOTE: Transportation with a CMV
within State lines is considered interstate
commerce if the origin and/or destination of
the cargo crosses State lines.
What is intrastate commerce?
Intrastate commerce is any trade, traffic
or transportation in any State which is not
described in the term `interstate' commerce.
NOTE: If you have a K-Restriction or
a 51-Restriction on your CDL, you are
limited to using the CDL only within the
borders of the state issuing that CDL.
Wis. Stat. 343.05(2)(a)2
­
­
­
COVER 14 CONTENTS
Commercial Learner
Permit (CLP)
New commercial drivers must obtain
a Commercial Learner Permit (CLP) to
practice driving a commercial motor vehicle
(CMV) and prepare for the CDL skills test.
To obtain a CLP you must:
· Be at least 18 years of age
· Hold a valid Wisconsin driver license
· Pass the knowledge tests for the type of
vehicle you will be driving
· Have a valid federal medical card.
Persons who do not have a valid federal
medical card will be restricted to:
 CDL intrastate only
 CDS intrastate only in excepted
industry
A Commercial Learner Permit (CLP) is valid
only to operate a CMV. The permit is valid
for 180 days and will list the type of vehicles
and endorsements for which you have
qualified. Certain restrictions will apply to
your operation with a CLP:
· You must have a qualified driving
instructor or a person who is licensed to
operate that type of CMV and who is at
least 21 years old, sitting next to you at
all times.
· You may not transport passengers.
However, if the accompanying driver is
a qualified instructor, 3 other persons
with commercial learner permits may
also ride along.
· Unless you are restricted, you may
transport property in a CMV while you
are driving with a CLP.
· You may not operate in interstate
commerce with a CLP unless you are
at least 21 years old and have a federal
medical certificate (Fed Med card).
Drivers who upgrade class, restrictions
or endorsements will need a CLP if the
upgrade requires a skills test.
Skills testing
You must have a CLP for 14 days before
you are allowed to take a skills test. All
applicants for a commercial driver license
must pass a skills test in the type of vehicle
they plan to drive. You must pass all three
segments of the skills test on the same CLP.
Any vehicle considered illegal for highway
use or for use on a skills test route, will not
be allowed for skills test purposes.
The license endorsements for driving
a school bus or other CMV carrying
passengers, require that the applicant pass
a skills test in a school bus or passenger-
carrying vehicle.
DMV authorizes third party examiners
to administer CDL skills tests. Contact an
authorized third party examiner to schedule
your CDL skills test. It is best to schedule
a skills test appointment well in advance.
You will have a minimum two-day waiting
period.
In addition to following the link above, you
can find the list of authorized third party
examiners by going to wisconsindmv.gov
and searching "third party examiners" using
the search bar.
Licensed commercial drivers are subject to
retesting by Wisconsin DMV and Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration CDL
examiners.
COVER 15 CONTENTS
Requirement School Bus "S" Endorsement
Special application (in addition
to form MV3001) Yes, self-certification form MV3740)
Fingerprinting Only required of those who have been a resident
of another state in the past two years.
Have no conviction for any
offense on the list of school bus
disqualifications
Applicant self-certifies on form MV3740. Background
check is conducted for original issuance, each renewal,
issuance of a duplicate and every 4 years.
Medical exam
Yes, at original issuance and renewal, plus biennial
proof of physical fitness. If 70 or older, annual
physical fitness reports are required.
Testing at renewal Yes, knowledge test, signs test and abbreviated skills test.
Military service CDL skills test waiver
You may qualify for a CDL skills test waiver if you obtained a military license issued by a
military facility that allowed you to operate a military commercial vehicle. You also avoid the
fee for the skills test when you qualify for this waiver.
Complete WisDOT form MV3588 and identify the type of vehicle operated. Include the
vehicle weight, capacity (trailer weight, number of passengers, tanker size, etc.) and whether
the vehicle had air brakes. This information will help a DMV staff person determine the
appropriate classes and endorsements for a Wisconsin CDL. WisDOT form MV3588 must be
signed by your commanding officer or a training officer. You must still pass the knowledge
test(s). You must be a Wisconsin resident to be eligible for this waiver. This waiver does not
include the skills test for the school bus "S" endorsement.
School bus "S" endorsement
Applicants for a school bus "S" endorsement must:
· Be at least 18 years of age.
· Have a valid Wisconsin driver license of the appropriate class.
· Present either a valid federal medical card or a completed Medical Examination Report
MV3030B to fulfill commercial driver license medical requirements.
· Have no conviction for any offense on the list of school bus disqualifications.
· Pass knowledge, road signs, vision and skills tests.
School bus disqualifications
A driver applying for, renewing or transferring a school bus endorsement will undergo a criminal
background check. A conviction for any offense on the list of school bus disqualifications will
result in from two years to a lifetime disqualification from driving a school bus.
In addition to following the link above, you can find the list of school bus disqualifications by
going to wisconsindmv.gov and searching "school bus disqualifications" using the search bar.
COVER 16 CONTENTS
Renewal of school bus
"S" endorsement
Wisconsin school bus drivers must pass
the knowledge test, road signs, vision and
an abbreviated skills test at renewal (if 70
or older, every 2 years) to retain their "S"
endorsement.
School bus drivers must also file a new
medical report every 2 years and upon
renewal of their "S" endorsement (if 70 or
older, every year). Section 10 in this manual
informs about driving a school bus.
School bus or
alternative vehicle
The publication School Bus or Alternative
Vehicle gives the definition of a school bus,
gives the definition of an alternative vehicle
for transport of students and certain other
people, and informs of driver requirements
for both vehicles.
In addition to following the link above,
you can find this publication by going to
wisconsindmv.gov and searching "school bus
or alternative vehicle" using the search bar.
Hazardous materials
"H" endorsement
Applicants for a hazardous materials
(HazMat) "H" endorsement must present
proof of citizenship or legal status in the
U.S. upon application for knowledge testing,
original issuance and all renewals.
When applying for, renewing or transferring
an "H" endorsement on a CDL, you will
need to provide your fingerprints for
an FBI criminal background check. You
should complete licensing requirements
with the Wisconsin DMV for a CDL and
"H" endorsement before you make an
appointment to have your fingerprints
collected.
Applicants for an "H" endorsement are
also subject to a name-based FBI criminal
history records check and a check of federal
databases. You will not be permitted
to obtain, renew or transfer an "H"
endorsement if you:
· Have been convicted or found not guilty
by reason of insanity of certain crimes
on the list of hazardous materials
disqualifications during the 7 years prior
to the date of your application.
· Have been in prison for any of those
certain crimes during the 5 years prior
to the date of your application.
· Are wanted or under indictment for any
of those certain crimes.
· Have been adjudicated as lacking mental
capacity or have been involuntarily
committed to a mental health facility as
specified in 49 CFR 1572.109.
In addition to following the link above, you
can find the list of hazardous materials
disqualifications by going to wisconsindmv.
gov and searching "hazardous materials
disqualifications" using the search bar.
If you hold an "H" endorsement and are
disqualified at any time, you must surrender
the "H" endorsement.
Section 9 in this manual informs about
transporting hazardous materials.
COVER 17 CONTENTS
Requirement Hazmat "H" Endorsement
Special application (in addition to form MV3001) Yes, application for "H"
endorsement form MV3735
Fingerprinting/Threat Assessment
Assessment includes fingerprints, criminal
history records check, proof of U.S. citizenship
or lawful permanent residence in the U.S.
and military service information including
branch, date and type of discharge.
Have no conviction for any offense on the list
of Hazardous Materials Disqualifications
Applicant self-certifies on form MV3735.
Background check is conducted for original
issuance, each renewal and for out-of-state
transfer applicants for H endorsement.
Testing at renewal Yes, knowledge test.
Present proof of citizenship or
legal status in the U. S.
Yes, upon application for knowledge testing,
original issuance and all renewals.
Renewal of "H" endorsement
DMV will coordinate the expiration date of your first "H" endorsement with the expiration
date of your CDL. This means your first "H" endorsement could be valid for up to five years
depending on when your CDL expires. All subsequent renewals of your "H" endorsement will
be valid for four years.
Fingerprinting and background checks must be completed for issuance of your first "H"
endorsement, at your first renewal and every four years thereafter even though your
commercial driver license may be valid for eight years. You must also pass a knowledge test
for the "H" endorsement, have a valid federal medical card and present proof of citizenship or
legal status in the U.S. at the same intervals.
Farm service CDL
A special, restricted Farm Service CDL is available for persons employed by a farm service
industry for 210 days or less per calendar year.
The publication Wisconsin Farm Service CDL explains what `farm service industry' means,
informs about the restrictions of a Farm Service CDL and lists requirements to obtain it.
In addition to following the link above, you can find this publication by going to
wisconsindmv.gov and searching "farm service CDL" using the search bar.
COVER 18 CONTENTS
Commercial driver license
medical requirements
To drive in intrastate or interstate non-
excepted commerce, you must have passed a
federal medical examination within the past
2 years, in accordance with Federal Motor
Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA)
regulations. FMCSA 49 CFR 391, Subpart E
details the physical qualifications needed to
operate a commercial motor vehicle.
What is acceptable proof
of examination?
Acceptable proof of examination is a
completed Medical Examiner's Certificate
(also called a Fed Med card). A certified
medical examiner completes and provides
the Medical Examiner's Certificate to you
upon completion your medical examination
and the FMCSA Medical Examination
Report. Only a certified medical examiner
may perform your federal medical
examination.
How can I find a certified
medical examiner?
You can find a certified medical examiner
by searching the National Registry of
Certified Medical Examiners. A Medical
Examiner's Certificate (Fed Med card) must
include the medical examiner's federal
registry number.
Are there federal exemptions
from any physical
impairments or diseases?
A person may apply for a federal exemption
(waiver) from the hearing and/or seizure
standards through the FMCSA Driver
Exemption Programs. These programs have
specific requirements. You might qualify if
you want to drive in interstate commerce
and are unable to obtain a Fed Med card
because you do not currently meet the
hearing and/or seizure standards.
Does Wisconsin offer any State
waivers to commercial drivers?
Yes, Wisconsin offers a State vision waivers
for commercial drivers who have less than
20/40 vision in either eye or less than
70-degree field of vision in either eye and do
not operate in an excepted industry.
A Wisconsin State waiver (for intrastate
commerce) is not the same as a Federal
exemption (for interstate commerce).
A Wisconsin waiver can be used for
intrastate commerce only.
In addition to following the link above, you
can find more information (including how
to apply) at wisconsindmv.gov and searching
"Wisconsin State waiver information for
CDL drivers."
What if I don't hold
a Fed Med card?
You will be issued a restricted CDL if you
do not hold a Fed Med card and are not
grandfathered. The license would only be
valid if you are a school bus driver or are
employed by a political subdivision (village,
town, city, state).
Refer to Federal Medical Standards
Frequently Asked Questions for answers to
common questions about federal medical
standards and grandfathering.
Direct other questions regarding federal
medical standards to:
U.S. DOT Office of Motor Carriers
1 Point Place, Suite 101
Madison, WI 53719-2809
Phone: (608) 662-2010
Website: www.fmcsa.gov
(Federal medical standard questions
only please)
COVER 19 CONTENTS
Who was grandfathered from
federal medical standards?
Drivers issued a Wisconsin CDL prior to
July 29, 1996 were grandfathered from
the federal medical standards that took
effect on that date. Grandfathered drivers
are not required to have a federal medical
exam or fulfill federal medical standards
to drive in intrastate (within Wisconsin
only) commerce. These drivers lose their
grandfathered status if their CDL is ever
revoked. Grandfathered status cannot be
transferred from one State to another.
Grandfathered drivers must still meet
Wisconsin medical standards such as
visual acuity of 20/60 in the best eye.
Grandfathered drivers may also appeal to
the Medical Review Board if they do not
meet Wisconsin medical standards.
Who is exempt from federal
medical standards?
Drivers employed by a political subdivision
(federal, state, county, city, township or
village) and operating a CMV owned by
the political subdivision are exempt from
the federal medical standards. These
drivers must still meet Wisconsin medical
standards and obtain a CDL corresponding
to the vehicle they plan to drive.
School bus drivers employed by a school
district and driving a school bus owned
by the district are exempt from the federal
medical standards. They may cross State
lines to transport students between home
and school or when driving for curricular or
extracurricular activities and charter trips.
School bus drivers employed by a
commercial contractor and driving a school
bus owned by the contractor are exempt
from the federal standards while operating
within Wisconsin. They may also cross State
lines to transport students between home
and school. But they are required to have a
valid federal medical card to drive across
State lines for curricular or extracurricular
activities and charter trips.
Drivers who do not have a federal medical
card and are not grandfathered will be
issued a CDL or Commercial Learner Permit
(CLP) with the following two restrictions:
· CDL intrastate only
· CDL intrastate only in excepted industry
These two restrictions limit a driver with a
CDL or CLP to:
· Operate a CMV for a political subdivision
provided they are an employee of the
political subdivision and the CDL has
the proper class and endorsement for the
CMV operated.
· Operate a school bus if they meet the
State medical standards for a school bus
endorsement and the CDL has the proper
class and endorsement for the CMV
operated.
NOTE: Drivers who have a Commercial
Learner Permit (CLP) with both
restrictions may not practice operating
a CMV with a commercial driving
school. Drivers who have a CLP with
both restrictions may take a commercial
driving course to operate a CMV through
a Wisconsin Technical College, however,
they must be an employee of political
subdivision and qualify as exempt.
COVER 20 CONTENTS
If you do not meet the federal visual acuity
standard of 20/40 in both eyes but have a
federal medical card, you will be referred
to a vision or other appropriate medical
specialist. If you are issued a CLP or CDL,
you will have the "CDL intrastate only"
restriction. You will also have the "CDL
intrastate only in excepted industry"
restriction if you are not grandfathered.
If you are 18, 19 or 20 years of age and are
not exempt by federal or state law, you will
need a federal medical card if you wish to
operate a CMV in intrastate commerce. If
you have a federal medical card, DMV will
issue your CDL with the "CDL intrastate
only" restriction because federal law does
not allow a person under age 21 to operate a
CMV in interstate commerce.
You can appeal to the Medical Review
Board for intrastate driving if you have been
grandfathered. You also can appeal to the
board if you are a new driver who plans to
drive for exempt groups (political subdivision
or school district). The Medical Review
Board, however, cannot make exceptions to
the federal standards. Therefore, no driver
required to have a federal medical card can
appeal to the board.
Federal medical standards
frequently asked questions
Since July 29, 1996 drivers of commercial
motor vehicles operating in intrastate
commerce must meet the federal medical
standards and present a valid federal
medical card when they apply for a
commercial driver license unless they have
been grandfathered or are exempt by federal
or state law.
What is interstate commerce? Any
trade, traffic or transportation in the U.S.
which is between a place in a State and a
place outside of such State, or is between
two places in a State through another State,
or a place outside of the U.S.
NOTE: Transportation with a CMV
within State lines is considered interstate
commerce if the origin and/or destination of
the cargo crosses State lines.
What is intrastate commerce? Any
trade, traffic or transportation in any State
that is not described in the term "interstate
commerce."
Is there a simple definition of
commerce? Every driver of a CMV is
considered to be in commerce unless
they are exempt, i.e. driving for a political
subdivision or driving a school bus.
Do CMV drivers employed by a
political subdivision need a federal
medical card? No. Drivers employed by
any political subdivision (federal, state,
county, city, township or village) operating a
CMV owned by the political subdivision are
exempt from the federal standards.
Do school bus drivers employed by a
school district or private contractor
need the federal medical card? Drivers
employed by a school district and driving a
bus owned by the district are exempt from
the federal standards. They may cross State
lines to transport students between home
and school or when driving for curricular or
extracurricular activities and charter trips.
COVER 21 CONTENTS
Drivers employed by a private contractor
and driving a bus owned by the contractor
are exempt from the federal standards
while operating within Wisconsin and
when crossing State lines to transport
students between home and school. A valid
federal medical card is required when
operating across State lines for curricular or
extracurricular activities and charter trips.
Are CMV drivers operating a
passenger bus exempt from federal
medical standards? No. Drivers
needing a "P" endorsement who do not
have the federal medical card and are not
grandfathered will be issued a license with
two restrictions: "CDL intrastate only" and
"CDL intrastate only in excepted industry.
These two restrictions do not cause a
problem for a driver with a "P" endorsement
who, for example, drives a bus owned by a
municipality (which is exempt).
The restrictions cause a problem for other
drivers with a "P" endorsement who, for
example, drive bus for a private human
service agency (not exempt). They must
present a federal medical card (unless
grandfathered) to prevent having these two
restrictions on their CDL. Applicants for
a CDL must know the type of operation in
which they will be involved to determine
if they will be required to have a federal
medical card.
May a driver who holds a Commercial
Learner Permit (CLP) with a "P"
endorsement, practice operating a
school bus? No. A driver must have an
"S" endorsement on their CLP to operate a
school bus.
May a driver who holds a CLP
practice operating a truck without a
federal medical card? It depends on who
owns the vehicle.
No, not if the vehicle is owned by a
commercial driving school or an employer
that is not a political subdivision.
Yes, if the vehicle is owned by a Wisconsin
Technical College or an employer that is a
political subdivision.
What happens to drivers who
don't pass a vision test, yet have a
federal medical card? They will be
referred to a vision or other appropriate
medical specialist. If issuance continues,
the license will have the "CDL interstate
only" restriction and, if the driver is not
grandfathered, the "CDL intrastate only in
excepted industry" restriction.
What type of driving may drivers
perform if they are not grandfathered
and do not have a federal medical
card? They may drive for exempt groups
(a political subdivision or school district) if
they meet the Wisconsin school bus driver
standards or are approved by the Medical
Review Board.
Do drivers age 18, 19, or 20 years old
need a federal medical card? Yes, if
they wish to operate a CMV in intrastate
commerce and are not exempt by federal or
state law. If they present a federal medical
card, their CDL will be issued with the "CDL
intrastate only" restriction because federal
law does not permit a person under age 21
to operate a CMV in interstate commerce.
COVER 22 CONTENTS
Who may appeal to the Medical
Review Board? Drivers who are
grandfathered may appeal to the Medical
Review Board for intrastate driving.
Additionally, a driver who plans to drive for
an exempt group (i.e. a political subdivision
or school district) may appeal to the Board.
The Medical Review Board, however,
cannot make any exceptions to the federal
standards. Therefore, no driver required to
have a federal medical card may appeal to
the Board.
Warnings and penalties
If you drive a vehicle over 10,000 pounds
in interstate commerce, you may be subject
to Federal Motor Carrier safety regulations
under 49 CFR 390.5. Contact a State Patrol
office for details.
In addition to following the link above,
you can find State Patrol office locations
and contact information by going to
wisconsindot.gov and searching "State
Patrol office locations".
Penalty for operating
without a CDL (for drivers)
1st Offense: $200­$600 fine or not
more than 6 months in jail; 3 points
2nd within 3 years: $300­$1,000 fine or
5 days to 6 months in jail; 3 points
3rd or more within 3 years: $1,000­
$2,000 fine and 10 days to 6 months in jail;
3 points
Penalty for operating without
a CDL (for employers)
The penalty for employers who place
unqualified drivers on the road is a
$2,500­$10,000 fine or not more than
90 days in jail; or both.
Wisconsin's Implied
Consent law
If a law enforcement officer asks you
to submit to testing to determine a
concentration of alcohol or other drugs in
your system, Wisconsin's Implied Consent
law requires you to do so. If you refuse to
take a test requested by the officer, your
operating privilege will be revoked for
a minimum of one year and you will be
subject to other penalties.
Oversize-overweight permits
You need to obtain a special permit to move
an oversize and/or overweight vehicle. The
web page Oversize-Overweight Permits
provides information to help you determine
when a permit is required, how to apply for
a permit and much more.
In addition to following the link above,
you can find this web page by going to
wisconsindmv.gov and searching "oversize-
overweight permits" using the search bar.
Additional notes
· You must renew your CDL every 8 years.
The 8-year period cannot be extended;
the license must be renewed.
· If you move (change your address), you
must apply for a duplicate CDL with your
new address within 10 days of moving.
Apply at any DMV Service Center.
· Wisconsin law requires issuance of only
one license to each driver.
· Wisconsin law requires enforcement of
CDL disqualifications for alcohol and
other serious traffic violations.
COVER 23 CONTENTS
Identifying human trafficking
As a professional driver, you are in a unique
position to identify potential cases of human
trafficking.
Human trafficking is a form of modern-day
slavery in which traffickers use force, fraud
or coercion to control victims for the purpose
of engaging in paid sex acts or working
against their will. This includes situations of
forced labor, debt bondage, and involuntary
child labor. People of all ages can be involved.
Minors under the age of 18 engaging in
commercial sex are considered to be victims
of human trafficking, regardless of how they
got involved. Make a difference. Identify
victims so they can be rescued and help bring
their perpetrators to justice.
· Notice someone not properly dressed
for the season, bruises or marks on
their person, not making sense when
speaking or not knowing where they
are or going, not in control of their own
identification documents (ID/passport),
communicating they are endangered.
· Call law enforcement. Do not
approach traffickers. The victims may
already be in danger. Do nothing to
make the situation worse.
· Tell law enforcement "actionable
information" and as many details as you
can provide.
 Description of cars (make, model,
color, license plate number, etc.) and
people (age, height, weight, hair color,
eye color, clothes, etc.) Take a picture
if you can.
 Specific time and dates. (What date
did you see the event in question take
place? What time?)
 Address and locations where
suspicious activity took place.
 Direction in which the vehicle left.
· National Human Trafficking
Resource Center
 1 (888) 373-7888
 Call for help or to report a tip 24
hours a day, 7 days a week.
COVER 24 CONTENTS
Human Trafficking (Wis. Stat. § 940.302)
ACTION DONE BY ANY OF THE
FOLLOWING FOR THE PURPOSE OF
Recruiting
or
Enticing
or
Harboring
or
Transporting
or
Providing
or
Obtaining
...an individual
­OR­
Attempting to do so
Causing or threatening to cause
bodily harm to any individual
or
Causing or threatening to cause
financial harm to any individual
or
Restraining or threatening to
restrain any individual
or
Violating or threatening to
violate a law
or
Destroying, concealing,
removing, confiscating or
possessing, or threatening
to destroy, conceal, remove,
confiscate or possess any actual
or purported passport or any
other actual or purported
official identification document
of any individual
or
Extortion
or
Fraud or deception
or
Debt bondage
or
Controlling any individual's
access to an addictive-controlled
substance
or
Using any scheme, pattern
or other means to directly or
indirectly, coerce, threaten or
intimidate any individual
or
Causing or threatening to cause
any individual to do any act
against the individual's will or
without the individual's consent
Labor
or
Services
or
A commercial sex act
COVER 25 CONTENTS
gross weight or registered weight of
26,000 pounds or less that either:
 is designed or used to transport 16
or more passengers, including the
driver.
 is of any size and is used in the
transportation of hazardous
materials as defined by 49 CFR
383.5.
Any vehicle for which a CDL is required is
considered a Commercial Motor Vehicle
(CMV).
To get a CDL, you must pass knowledge
and skills tests. This manual will help you
prepare for the tests. This manual is not
a substitute for a truck driver training
class or program. Formal training is
the most reliable way to learn the many
special skills required for safely driving a
large commercial vehicle and becoming a
professional driver in the trucking industry.
1.1 Commercial driver
license tests
1.1.1 Knowledge tests
You will have to take one or more knowledge
tests, depending on what class of license
and what endorsements you need. The CDL
knowledge tests include:
· The General Knowledge Test, taken
by all applicants.
· The Passenger Transport Test, taken
by all bus driver applicants.
· The Air Brakes Test, which you must
take if your vehicle has air brakes,
including air over hydraulic brakes.
· The Combination Vehicles Test,
which is required if you want to drive
combination vehicles.
PART ONE
Section 1: Introduction
Section 2: Driving safely
Section 3: Transporting cargo safely
Part one is for all commercial drivers.
SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION
This section covers:
· Commercial Driver License Tests
· Medical Documentation Requirements
· Driver Disqualifications
· Other CDL Rules
· IRP and IFTA
There is a federal requirement that each
state have minimum standards for the
licensing of commercial drivers.
This manual provides driver license
testing information for Wisconsin drivers
who wish to obtain a Commercial Driver
License (CDL). This manual does not
provide information on all federal and state
requirements needed before you can drive a
Commercial Motor Vehicle (CMV).
You must have a CDL to operate:
· Combination vehicle (Class A) with
a Gross Combination Weight Rating
(GCWR), actual gross weight or
registered weight of over 26,000 pounds,
inclusive of a towed unit(s) with a Gross
Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR), actual
gross weight or registered weight of over
10,000 pounds.
· Heavy straight vehicle (Class B) with a
Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR),
actual gross weight or registered weight
of over 26,000 pounds.
· Small vehicle (Class C) with a Gross
Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR), actual
COVER 26 CONTENTS
· The Hazardous Materials Test,
required if you want to transport
hazardous materials as defined in
49 CFR 383.5. In order to obtain this
endorsement you are also required
to pass a Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) background check.
· The Tank Vehicle Test, required if
you want to haul any liquid or gaseous
materials in a tank or tanks having an
individual rated capacity of more than
119 gallons and an aggregate rated
capacity of 1,000 gallons or more that
is either permanently or temporarily
attached to the vehicle or chassis.
· The Doubles/Triples Test, required if
you want to pull double or triple trailers.
· The School Bus Test, required if you
want to drive a school bus.
1.1.2 Skills tests
After you have passed the required
knowledge test(s), you must have your
Commercial Learner Permit for 14 days
before you are allowed to take a skills test.
There are three types of general skills that
will be tested. They must be taken in the
following order:
· Vehicle inspection.
· Basic vehicle control.
· On-road driving.
You must take these tests in a representative
vehicle for the CDL you wish to obtain.
Any vehicle that has components marked
or labeled cannot be used for the Vehicle
Inspection Test. For CDL testing purposes:
· The manufacturer's Gross Vehicle Weight
Rating determines whether a vehicle is
eligible to be used;
· A Class A tractor from a Class A tractor-
trailer combination vehicle cannot be
used for Class B testing.
Vehicle inspection
You will be tested to see if you know
whether your vehicle is safe to drive. You
will be asked to do a inspection of your
vehicle and explain to the examiner what
you would inspect and why. Section 11M of
this manual tells you what to inspect and
how to inspect it.
Basic vehicle control
You will be tested on your skill to control
the vehicle. You will be asked to move your
vehicle forward, backward and turn it
within a defined area. These areas may be
marked with traffic lanes, cones, barriers
or something similar. The examiner will
tell you how each control test is to be done.
Section 12M of this manual explains more
about this test.
On-road test
You will be tested on your skill to safely
drive your vehicle in a variety of traffic
situations. The situations may include left
and right turns, intersections, railroad
crossings, curves, up and down grades,
single or multi-lane roads, streets or
highways. The examiner will tell you where
to drive. Section 13 of this manual explains
more about this test.
COVER 27 CONTENTS
1.2 Medical documentation
requirements
When you apply for a CDL or Commercial
Learner Permit (CLP); or renew, upgrade,
add endorsements to or transfer a CDL
from another state, you are required to
provide information to your State Driver
License Agency (SDLA) regarding the type
of commercial motor vehicle operation you
drive in or expect to drive in with your
CDL. Drivers operating in certain types
of commerce will be required to submit a
current medical examiner's certificate and/
or any medical variance documents that
you have been issued (i.e. Vision, Skills
Performance waivers, or other exemptions)
to your SDLA to obtain a "certified" medical
status as part of your driving record. You
must contact your State Driver Licensing
Agency (SDLA) to obtain information
regarding the requirement for submitting
these documents.
If you are required to have a "certified"
medical status and fail to provide and
keep up-to-date your medical examiner's
certificate you become "not-certified" and
may lose your CDL.
For the purpose of complying with the
requirements for medical certification, it
is important to know how you will use the
CMV. The following information will help
you decide how to self-certify:
1.2.1 Interstate or
intrastate commerce
Do you, or will you, use a CDL to operate a
CMV in interstate or intrastate commerce?
Interstate commerce is when you drive a
CMV:
· From one State to another State or a
foreign country;
· Between two places within a State, but
during part of the trip, the CMV crosses
into another State or foreign country; or
· Between two places within a State, but
the cargo or passengers are part of a trip
that began or will end in another State or
foreign country.
Intrastate commerce is when you drive a
CMV within a state and you do not meet
any of the descriptions above for interstate
commerce.
· If you operate in both intrastate
commerce and interstate commerce, you
must choose interstate commerce.
1.2.2 Inter/intrastate
commerce: Status non-
excepted or excepted?
Once you decide whether you will operate
in interstate commerce or intrastate
commerce, you must decide whether you
will operate (or expect to operate) in a non-
excepted or excepted status. This decision
will tell you to which of the four types of
commerce you must self-certify.
Interstate commerce
You operate in excepted interstate
commerce when you drive a CMV in
interstate commerce only for the following
excepted activities:
· To transport school children and/or
school staff between home and school;
· As Federal, State or local government
employees;
· To transport human corpses or sick or
injured persons;
COVER 28 CONTENTS
· Fire truck or rescue vehicle drivers
during emergencies and other related
activities;
· Primarily in the transportation of
propane winter heating fuel when
responding to an emergency condition
requiring immediate response such as
damage to a propane gas system after a
storm or flooding;
· In response to a pipeline emergency
condition requiring immediate response
such as a pipeline leak or rupture;
· In custom harvesting on a farm or to
transport farm machinery and supplies
used in the custom harvesting operation
to and from a farm or to transport custom
harvested crops to storage or market;
· Beekeeper in the seasonal transportation
of bees;
· Controlled and operated by a farmer, but
is not a combination vehicle (power unit
and towed unit), and is used to transport
agricultural products, farm machinery or
farm supplies (no placardable hazardous
materials) to and from a farm and within
150 air-miles of the farm;
· As a private motor carrier of passengers
for non-business purposes ; or
· To transport migrant workers.
If you answered yes to one or more of the
above activities as the only operation in
which you drive, you operate in excepted
interstate commerce and do not need a
Federal medical examiner's certificate.
If you answered no to all of the above
activities, you operate in non-excepted
interstate commerce and are required
to provide a current medical examiner's
certificate (49 CFR 391.45),commonly
referred to as a medical certificate or DOT
card, to your State Driver Licensing Agency
(SDLA). Most CDL holders who drive CMVs
in interstate commerce are non-excepted
interstate commerce drivers.
If you operate in both excepted interstate
commerce and non-excepted interstate
commerce, you must choose non-excepted
interstate commerce to be qualified
to operate in both types of interstate
commerce.
Intrastate commerce
You operate in excepted Intrastate
commerce when you drive a CMV only in
intrastate commerce only for the following
excepted activities:
· To transport school children and/or
school staff between home and school;
· As Federal, State or local government
employees;
· To transport human corpses or sick or
injured persons;
· Fire truck or rescue vehicle drivers
during emergencies and other related
activities;
· Primarily in the transportation of
propane winter heating fuel when
responding to an emergency condition
requiring immediate response such as
damage to a propane gas system after a
storm or flooding;
· In response to a pipeline emergency
condition requiring immediate response
such as a pipeline leak or rupture;
· In custom harvesting on a farm or to
transport farm machinery and supplies
used in the custom harvesting operation
to and from a farm or to transport
COVER 29 CONTENTS
custom harvested crops to storage or
market;
· Beekeeper in the seasonal transportation
of bees;
· Controlled and operated by a farmer, but
is not a combination vehicle (power unit
and towed unit), and is used to transport
agricultural products, farm machinery or
farm supplies (no placardable hazardous
materials) to and from a farm and within
150 air-miles of the farm;
· As a private motor carrier of passengers
for non-business purposes
· To transport migrant workers.
· Tow Trucks (if requested by Federal,
State, or local officer to move wrecked or
disabled vehicle)
· Grandfathered (held valid WI CDL since
July 29, 1996 that has not been revoked)
· Wisconsin vision exemption to the Fed
Med card
You operate in non-excepted intrastate
commerce when you drive a CMV only
in intrastate commerce and are required
to meet your State of licensure's medical
certification requirements (contact your
SDLA about their requirements).
If you operate in both excepted intrastate
commerce and non-excepted intrastate
commerce, you must choose non-excepted
intrastate commerce.
1.2.3 Self-certification
statements
When completing an application for your
CDL, you will need to select a tier of
operation. Please see Commercial Driver
Certification: Tier of Operation MV3230 for
detailed information and how to determine
your commercial motor vehicle tier of
operation.
1.3 CDL disqualifications
See list of CDL disqualifications online.
In addition to following the link above, you
can find the list of CDL disqualifications
at wisconsindmv.gov and searching "CDL
disqualifications" using the search bar.
1.4 Other CDL rules
There are other federal and state rules that
affect drivers operating CMVs in all States.
Among them are:
· You cannot have more than one license.
If you break this rule, a court may fine
you up to $5,000 or put you in jail, keep
your home state license and return any
others.
· You must notify your employer within
30 days of a conviction for any traffic
violations (except parking). This is true
no matter what type of vehicle you were
driving.
· You must notify your motor vehicle
licensing agency within thirty days if you
are convicted in any other jurisdiction
of any traffic violation (except parking).
This is true no matter what type of
vehicle you were driving.
COVER 30 CONTENTS
· You must notify your employer within 2
business days if your driving privilege is
suspended, revoked or canceled, or if you
are disqualified from driving.
· You must give your employer information
on all driving jobs you have held for the
past 10 years. You must do this when you
apply for a commercial driving job.
· No one can drive a commercial motor
vehicle without a CDL. A court may fine
you up to $5,000 or put you in jail for
breaking this rule.
· If you have a hazardous materials
endorsement, you must notify and
surrender your hazardous materials
endorsement to the state that issued your
CDL within 24 hours of any conviction
or indictment in any jurisdiction, civilian
or military, for or found not guilty by
reason of insanity, of a disqualifying
crime listed in 49 CFR 1572.103; who is
adjudicated as lacking mental capacity
or has been involuntarily committed to a
mental health facility as specified in 49
CFR 1572.109; or who renounces his or
her U.S. citizenship.
· Your employer may not let you drive a
commercial motor vehicle if you have
more than one license or if your CDL is
suspended or revoked. A court may fine
the employer up to $5,000 or put him/
her in jail for breaking this rule.
· All states are connected to one
computerized system to share
information about CDL drivers. The
states will check the system to be sure
that drivers do not have more than
one CDL.
· You are not allowed to hold a
mobile telephone to conduct a voice
communication or dial a mobile
telephone by pressing more than a single
button when driving.
· You are not allowed to send or read text
messages while driving.
· You must be properly restrained by a
safety belt at all times while operating a
commercial motor vehicle. The safety belt
design holds the driver securely behind
the wheel during a crash, helping the
driver to control the vehicle and reduces
the chance of serious injury or death. If
you do not wear a safety belt, you are 4
times more likely to be fatally injured if
you are thrown from the vehicle.
1.5 International Registration
Plan (IRP) and International
Fuel Tax Agreement (IFTA)
If you operate a CMV in interstate
commerce, the vehicle, with few exceptions,
is required to be registered under the
International Registration Plan (IRP) and
the International Fuel Tax Agreement
(IFTA).
In addition to following the two links above,
you can find the IRP and IFTA information
at wisconsindmv.gov and searching "IRP"
and "IFTA" using the search bar.
COVER 31 CONTENTS
SECTION 2: DRIVING
SAFELY
This section covers:
· Vehicle Inspection
· Basic Control of Your Vehicle
· Shifting Gears
· Seeing
· Communicating
· Space Management
· Controlling Your Speed
· Seeing Hazards
· Distracted Driving
· Aggressive Drivers/Road Rage
· Night Driving and Driver Fatigue
· Driving in Fog
· Winter Driving
· Hot Weather Driving
· Railroad-Highway Crossings
· Mountain Driving
· Driving Emergencies
· Antilock Braking Systems
· Skid Control and Recovery
· Accident Procedures
· Fires
· Alcohol, Other Drugs and Driving
· Hazardous Materials Rules
This section contains knowledge and safe
driving information that all commercial
drivers should know. You must pass a test
on this information to get a CDL.
This section does not have specific
information on air brakes, combination
vehicles, doubles or passenger vehicles.
When preparing for the Vehicle Inspection
Test, you must review the material in
Section 11M in addition to the information
in this section.
This section does have basic information
on hazardous materials (HazMat) that all
drivers should know. If you need a HazMat
endorsement, you should study Section 9.
2.1 Vehicle inspection
2.1.1 Why inspect?
Safety for yourself and for other road users
is the most important reason you inspect
your vehicle.
A vehicle defect found during an inspection
could save you problems later. You could
have a breakdown on the road that will cost
time and money or, even worse, a crash
caused by the defect.
Federal and state laws require that drivers
inspect their vehicles. Federal and state
inspectors also may inspect your vehicles. If
they judge the vehicle to be unsafe, they will
put it "out of service" until it is fixed.
2.1.2 Types of vehicle inspection
Vehicle inspection
A vehicle inspection will help you find
problems that could cause a crash or
breakdown.
During a trip
For safety you should:
· Watch gauges for signs of trouble.
· Use your senses to check for problems
(look, listen, smell, feel).
· Check critical items when you stop:
 Tires, wheels and rims.
 Brakes.
 Lights and reflectors.
COVER 32 CONTENTS
 Brake and electrical connections to
trailer.
 Trailer coupling devices.
 Cargo securement devices.
After-trip inspection and report
You should do an after-trip inspection at the
end of the trip, day or tour of duty on each
vehicle you operated. It may include filling
out a vehicle condition report listing any
problems you find. The inspection report
helps the motor carrier know when the
vehicle needs repairs.
2.1.3 What to look for
Tire problems
· Too much or too little air pressure.
· Bad wear. You need at least 4/32-inch
tread depth in every major groove on
front tires. You need 2/32-inch on other
tires. No fabric should show through the
tread or sidewall.
· Cuts or other damage.
· Tread separation.
· Dual tires that come in contact with each
other or parts of the vehicle.
· Mismatched sizes.
· Radial and bias-ply tires used together.
· Cut or cracked valve stems.
· Regrooved, recapped or retreaded tires
on the front wheels of a bus. These are
prohibited.
Wheel and rim problems
· Damaged rims.
· Rust around lug nuts may mean the nuts
are loose­check tightness. After a tire
has been changed, stop a short while
later and re-check tightness of nuts.
· Missing clamps, spacers, studs or lugs
means danger.
· Mismatched, bent or cracked lock rings
are dangerous.
· Wheels or rims that have had welding
repairs are not safe.
Bad brake drums or shoes
· Cracked drums.
· Shoes or pads with oil, grease or brake
fluid on them.
· Shoes or pads worn dangerously thin,
missing or broken.
Steering system defects
· Missing nuts, bolts, cotter keys or
other parts.
· Bent, loose or broken parts, such as
steering column, steering gear box or
tie rods.
· If power steering equipped, check hoses,
pumps and fluid level; check for leaks.
· Steering wheel play of more than
10 degrees (approximately 2 inches
movement at the rim of a 20-inch
steering wheel) can make it hard to steer.
COVER 33 CONTENTS
Hydraulic Shock
Abosorber
Vehicle Frame
Front Axle
Leaf Spring
Frame
Bearings Plate Hanger
Spring Shackle
Main Spring
Axle
Torque Rod
Auxiliary Spring
Figure 2-3: Safety Defect: Broken Leaf in
Leaf Spring
Broken Leaf
Main Spring
Axle
Figure 2-1: Steering System Figure 2-2: Key Suspension Parts
Steering Wheel
Tie Rod
Steering Shaft
Steering Arms
Hydraulic Fluid
Reservoir
Drag Link
Steering Gear Box
Pitman Arm Spindle
Steering Knuckle
Suspension system defects
The suspension system holds up the vehicle
and its load. It keeps the axles in place.
Therefore, broken suspension parts can be
extremely dangerous. Look for:
· Spring hangers that allow movement of
the axle from the proper position. See
Figure 2-2.
· Cracked or broken spring hangers.
· Missing or broken leaves in any leaf
spring. If one-fourth or more are
missing, it will put the vehicle "out
of service," but any defect could be
dangerous. See Figure 2-3.
· Broken leaves in a multi-leaf spring or
leaves that have shifted so they might hit
a tire or other part.
· Leaking shock absorbers.
· Torque rod or arm, U-bolts, spring
hangers or other axle positioning parts
that are cracked, damaged or missing.
· Air suspension systems that are damaged
and/or leaking. See Figure 2-4.
· Any loose, cracked, broken or missing
frame members.
COVER 34 CONTENTS
Frame Reinforcement
Height Control Valve
Upper Bellows Support
Shock Absorber
Spacer
Bellows
Lower Bellows
Support
Axel Seat
Axel
Anchor Plate
Control
Arm
Eye Bolt
Bracket
FRONT
Clamp
Bolt
U Bolt
Exhaust system defects
A broken exhaust system can let poison
fumes into the cab or sleeper berth. Look for:
· Loose, broken or missing exhaust pipes,
mufflers, tailpipes or vertical stacks.
· Loose, broken or missing mounting
brackets, clamps, bolts or nuts.
· Exhaust system parts rubbing against
fuel system parts, tires or other moving
parts of the vehicle.
· Exhaust system parts that are leaking.
Emergency equipment
Vehicles must be equipped with emergency
equipment. Look for:
· Fire extinguisher(s).
· Spare electrical fuses (unless equipped
with circuit breakers).
· Warning devices for parked vehicles:
three reflective warning triangles or at
least six fusees or three liquid burning
flares.
Cargo (trucks)
You must make sure the truck is not
overloaded and the cargo is balanced
and secured before each trip. If the cargo
contains hazardous materials, you must
inspect for proper papers and placarding.
Test your knowledge
1. What is the most important reason for
doing a vehicle inspection?
2. What things should you check during a
trip?
3. Name some key steering system parts.
4. Name some suspension system defects.
5. What three kinds of emergency
equipment must you have?
6. What is the minimum tread depth for
front tires?
7. What is the minimum tread depth for
other tires?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 2.1.1 to 2.1.3.
2.1.4 CDL vehicle inspection test
In order to obtain a CDL you will be
required to pass a vehicle inspection
test. You will be tested to see if you know
whether your vehicle is safe to drive. You
will be asked to do a vehicle inspection
of your vehicle. You must point to, touch
and name the item you are inspecting and
explain to the examiner what you would
inspect and why. Section 11M of this manual
tells you what to inspect and how to inspect
it. The guides shown in Section 11M may be
used as a memory aid when taking your test.
The following seven-step inspection method
should be useful.
2.1.5 Seven-step
inspection method
Method of inspection
You should do a vehicle inspection the same
way each time so you will learn all the steps
and be less likely to forget something.
Figure 2-4: Air Suspension Parts
COVER 35 CONTENTS
Please refer to Section 11M of this manual
for additional guidance regarding the
methods of vehicle inspection during the
CDL skills exam.
Step 1: Vehicle overview
Approaching the Vehicle. Notice general
condition. Look for damage or vehicle
leaning to one side. Look under the vehicle
for fresh oil, coolant, grease or fuel leaks.
Check the area around the vehicle for
hazards to vehicle movement (people, other
vehicles, objects, low hanging wires, tree
limbs, etc.).
Review Last Vehicle Inspection Report.
Drivers may have to make a vehicle
inspection report in writing each day. The
motor carrier must repair any items in
the report that affect safety and certify on
the report that repairs were made or were
unnecessary. You must sign the report only
if defects were noted and certified to be
repaired or not needed to be repaired.
Step 2: Check engine compartment
Make sure the parking brakes are on
and/or the wheels are chocked. You
may have to raise the hood, tilt the cab
(secure loose things so they don't fall and
break something) or open the engine
compartment door. Check the following:
· Engine oil level. Coolant level in radiator;
condition of hoses.
· Power steering fluid level; hose condition
(if so equipped).
· Windshield washer fluid level.
· Battery fluid level, connections and
tie downs (battery may be located
elsewhere).
· Automatic transmission fluid level (may
require the engine to be running).
· Check belts for tightness and excessive
wear (alternator, water pump, air
compressor). Learn how much "give"
the belts should have when adjusted
correctly and check each one.
· Leaks in the engine compartment
(fuel, coolant, oil, power steering fluid,
hydraulic fluid, battery fluid).
· Cracked, worn electrical wiring
insulation.
Lower and secure the hood, cab or engine
compartment door.
Step 3: Start engine and inspect
inside the cab
Get In and Start Engine
· Make sure the parking brake is on.
· Put the gearshift in neutral (or "park" if
automatic).
· Start engine; listen for unusual noises.
· If equipped, check the Anti-lock Braking
System (ABS) indicator lights. Light on
dash should come on and then turn off.
If it stays on, the ABS is not working
properly. For trailers only, if the yellow
light on the left rear of the trailer stays
on, the ABS is not working properly.
Look at the Gauges
· Oil pressure. Should come up to normal
within seconds after the engine is
started.
· Air pressure. Pressure should build
from 50 to 90 psi within 3 minutes.
Build air pressure to governor cut-out
(usually around 120­140 psi). Know your
vehicle's requirements.
COVER 36 CONTENTS
· Ammeter and/or voltmeter. Should be in
normal range(s).
· Coolant temperature. Should begin a
gradual rise to normal operating range.
· Engine oil temperature. Should begin a
gradual rise to normal operating range.
· Warning lights and buzzers. Oil,
coolant, charging circuit warning and
antilock brake system lights should go
out right away.
Figure 2-5
OIL PRESSURE
Idling: 5­20 PSI
Operating: 35­75 PSI
LOW, DROPPING, FLUCTUATING:
STOP IMMEDIATELY!
Without oil the engine
can be destroyed rapidly
Check Condition of Controls
Check all of the following for looseness,
sticking, damage or improper setting:
· Steering wheel.
· Clutch.
· Accelerator ("gas pedal").
· Brake controls.
 Service (Foot) brake.
 Trailer brake (if the vehicle has one).
 Parking brake.
 Retarder controls (if the vehicle has
them).
· Transmission controls.
· Interaxle differential lock (if the vehicle
has one).
· Horn(s).
· Windshield wipers/washers.
· Lights.
 Headlights.
 Dimmer switch.
 Turn signal.
 Four-way flashers.
 Parking, clearance, identification,
marker switch(es).
Check Mirrors and Windshield
Inspect the mirrors and windshield for
cracks, dirt, illegal stickers or other vision
obstructions. Clean and adjust as necessary.
Check Emergency Equipment
· Check for safety equipment:
 Spare electrical fuses (unless the
vehicle has circuit breakers).
 Three red reflective triangles, 6
fusees or 3 liquid burning flares.
 Properly charged and rated fire
extinguisher(s).
· Check for optional items such as:
 Tire chains (where winter conditions
require them).
 Tire changing equipment.
 List of emergency phone numbers.
 Accident reporting kit (packet).
COVER 37 CONTENTS
Check Safety Belt
Check that the safety belt is securely
mounted, adjusts, latches properly and is
not ripped or frayed.
Step 4: Turn off engine and check
lights
Make sure the parking brake is set, turn
off the engine and take the key with you.
Turn on the headlights (low beams) and
four-way emergency flashers and get out of
the vehicle.
Step 5: Do walk-around inspection
· Go to the front of the vehicle and check
that low beams are on and both of the
four-way flashers are working.
· Push the dimmer switch and check that
high beams work.
· Turn off the headlights and four-way
emergency flashers.
· Turn on the parking, clearance, side-
marker and identification lights.
· Turn on the right turn signal and start
the walk-around inspection.
General
· Walk around and inspect.
· Clean all lights, reflectors and glass as
you go along.
Left Front Side
· Driver's door glass should be clean.
· Door latches or locks should work
properly.
· Left front wheel.
 Condition of wheel and rim­missing,
bent, broken studs, clamps, lugs or
any signs of misalignment.
 Condition of tires: properly inflated,
proper tread depth, valve stem and
cap OK, no serious cuts, bulges or
tread wear.
 Use a wrench to test rust-streaked
lug nuts, indicating looseness.
 Hub oil level OK, no leaks.
· Left front suspension.
 Condition of the springs, spring
hangers, shackles, U-bolts.
 Shock absorber condition.
· Left front brake.
 Condition of the brake drum or disc.
 Condition of the hoses.
Front
· Condition of the front axle.
· Condition of the steering system.
 No loose, worn, bent, damaged or
missing parts.
 Must grab the steering mechanism to
test for looseness.
· Condition of the windshield.
 Check for damage and clean if dirty.
 Check the windshield wiper arms for
proper spring tension.
 Check the wiper blades for damage,
"stiff" rubber and securement.
· Lights and reflectors.
 Parking, clearance and identification
lights are clean, operating and the
proper color (amber at front).
 Reflectors are clean and the proper
color (amber at front).
 Right front turn signal light is clean,
operating and is the proper color
(amber or white on signals facing
forward).
COVER 38 CONTENTS
Right Side
· Right front: check all items as done on
left front.
· Primary and secondary safety cab locks
engaged (if cab-over-engine design).
· Right fuel tank(s).
 Securely mounted, not damaged or
leaking.
 Fuel crossover line is secure.
 Tank(s) contain enough fuel.
 Cap(s) are on and secure.
· Condition of visible parts.
 Rear of engine­not leaking.
 Transmission­not leaking.
 Exhaust system­secure, not leaking,
not touching wires, fuel or air lines.
 Frame and cross members­no bends
or cracks.
 Air lines and electrical wiring­
secured against snagging, rubbing
or wearing.
 Spare tire carrier or rack is not
damaged (if so equipped).
 Spare tire and/or wheel is securely
mounted in rack.
 Spare tire and wheel is adequate
(proper size, properly inflated).
· Cargo securement (trucks).
 Cargo is properly blocked, braced,
tied, chained, etc.
 Header board is adequate and secure
(if required).
 Side boards, stakes are strong
enough, free of damage, properly set
in place (if so equipped).
 Canvas or tarp (if required) is
properly secured to prevent tearing,
billowing or blocking of mirrors.
 If oversize, all required signs (flags,
lamps and reflectors) must be
safely and properly mounted and
all required permits are in driver's
possession.
 Curbside cargo compartment doors
are in good condition, securely
closed, latched/locked and required
security seals are in place.
Right Rear
· Condition of wheels and rims­no
missing, bent or broken spacers, studs,
clamps or lugs.
· Condition of tires­properly inflated,
proper tread depth, valve stems and caps
are okay, no serious cuts, bulges, tread
wear, tires not rubbing each other and
nothing is stuck between them.
· Tires are of the same type, e.g., not
mixed radial and bias types.
· Tires evenly matched (same sizes).
· Wheel bearing/seals are not leaking.
· Suspension.
 Condition of spring(s), spring
hangers, shackles and U-bolts.
 Axle is secure.
 Powered axle(s) is not leaking lube
(gear oil).
 Condition of the torque rod arms,
bushings.
 Condition of the shock absorber(s).
COVER 39 CONTENTS
 If retractable axle equipped, check
the condition of the lift mechanism.
If air powered, check for leaks.
 Condition of air suspension
components (if equipped).
· Brakes.
 Brake adjustment.
 Condition of the brake drum(s) or
discs.
 Condition of the hoses­look for any
wear due to rubbing.
· Lights and reflectors.
 Side-marker lights are clean,
operating and are the proper color
(red at rear, others amber).
 Side-marker reflectors are clean
and are the proper color (red at rear,
others amber).
Rear
· Lights and reflectors.
 Rear clearance and identification
lights are clean, operating and are
the proper color (red at rear).
 Reflectors are clean and are the
proper color (red at rear).
 Taillights are clean, operating and
are the proper color (red at rear).
 Right rear turn signal is operating
and is the proper color (red, yellow or
amber at rear).
· License plate(s) are present, clean and
secured.
· Splash guards are present, not damaged,
properly fastened, not dragging on the
ground or rubbing tires. Cargo secure
(trucks).
 Cargo is properly blocked, braced,
tied, chained, etc.
 Tailboards are up and properly
secured.
 End gates are free of damage and are
properly secured in stake sockets.
 Canvas or tarp (if required) is
properly secured to prevent tearing
or billowing that may block your view
in mirrors or cover the rear lights.
 If over-length or over-width, make
sure all signs and/or additional
lights/flags are safely and properly
mounted and all required permits are
in the driver's possession.
 Rear doors are securely closed,
latched/locked.
Left Side
· Check all items same as right side, plus:
 Battery(ies) (if not mounted in engine
compartment).
 Battery box(es) securely mounted to
vehicle.
 Box has secure cover.
 Battery(ies) secured against
movement.
 Battery(ies) not broken or leaking.
 Fluid in battery(ies) is at the proper
level (except maintenance-free type).
 Cell caps are present and are securely
tightened (except maintenance-free
type).
 Vents in cell caps are free of foreign
material (except maintenance-free
type).
COVER 40 CONTENTS
Step 6: Check signal lights
Get In and Turn Off Lights
· Turn off all lights.
· Turn on the stop lights (apply trailer
hand brake or have a helper put on the
brake pedal).
· Turn on the left turn signal lights.
Get Out and Check Lights
· Left front turn signal light is clean,
operating and is the proper color (amber
or white on signals facing the front).
· Left rear turn signal light and both stop
lights are clean, operating and are the
proper color (red, yellow or amber).
Get In Vehicle
· Turn off any lights not needed for
driving.
· Check for all required papers, trip
manifests, permits, etc.
· Secure all loose articles in the cab (they
may interfere with operation of the
controls or hit you in a crash).
· Start the engine.
Step 7: Start the engine and check
brake system
Test For Hydraulic Leaks
If the vehicle has hydraulic brakes, pump
the brake pedal three times. Then apply
firm pressure to the pedal and hold for five
seconds. The pedal should not move. If it
does, there may be a leak or other problem.
Get it fixed before driving.
If the vehicle has air brakes, do the checks
described in Section 5 and Section 6 of this
manual.
Test Parking Brake(s)
· Fasten safety belt
· Set parking brake (power unit only).
· Release trailer parking brake (if
applicable).
· Place vehicle into a low gear.
· Gently pull forward against parking
brake to make sure the parking brake
holds.
· Repeat the same steps for the trailer with
trailer parking brake set and power unit
parking brakes released (if applicable).
· If it doesn't hold vehicle, it is faulty; get it
fixed.
Test Service (Foot) Brake Stopping Action
· Go about five miles per hour.
· Push the brake pedal firmly.
· "Pulling" to one side or the other can
mean brake trouble.
· Any unusual brake pedal "feel" or
delayed stopping action can mean
trouble.
This completes the vehicle inspection.
If you find anything unsafe during the
vehicle inspection, get it fixed. Federal and
state laws forbid operating an unsafe vehicle.
COVER 41 CONTENTS
Test your knowledge
1. Name some things you should check on
the front of your vehicle during the walk-
around inspection.
2. What should wheel bearing seals be
checked for?
3. How many red reflective triangles should
you carry?
4. How do you test hydraulic brakes for
leaks?
5. Can you bring the "vehicle inspection
memory aide" with you to the test?
6. Why put the starter switch key in your
pocket during the vehicle inspection?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsection 2.1.
2.2 Basic control of
your vehicle
To drive a vehicle safely, you must be able
to control its speed and direction. Safe
operation of a commercial vehicle requires
skill in:
· Accelerating.
· Steering.
· Stopping.
· Backing safely.
Fasten your seat belt when on the road.
Apply the parking brake when you leave
your vehicle.
2.1.6 Inspection during a trip
Check vehicle operation regularly
You should check:
· Instruments.
· Air pressure gauge (if you have air
brakes).
· Temperature gauges.
· Pressure gauges.
· Ammeter/Voltmeter.
· Mirrors.
· Tires.
· Cargo, cargo covers.
· Lights.
· Any other item required for safe
operation of your vehicle.
If you see, hear, smell or feel anything that
might mean trouble, check it out.
Safety inspection
Drivers of trucks and truck tractors when
transporting cargo must inspect the
securement of the cargo within the first 50
miles of a trip and every 150 miles or every
3 hours (whichever comes first) after.
2.1.7 After-trip inspection
and report
You may have to make a written report
each day on the condition of the vehicle(s)
you drove. Report anything affecting
safety or possibly leading to a mechanical
breakdown.
The vehicle inspection report tells the
motor carrier about problems that may
need fixing. Keep a copy of your report in
the vehicle for one day. That way, the next
driver can learn about any problems you
have found.
COVER 42 CONTENTS
2.2.1 Accelerating
Don't roll back when you start. You may hit
someone behind you. If you have a manual
transmission vehicle, partly engage the clutch
before you take your right foot off the brake.
Put on the parking brake whenever necessary
to keep from rolling back. Release the
parking brake only when you have applied
enough engine power to keep from rolling
back. On a tractor-trailer equipped with a
trailer brake hand valve, the hand valve can
be applied to keep from rolling back.
Speed up smoothly and gradually so the
vehicle does not jerk. Rough acceleration
can cause mechanical damage. When
pulling a trailer, rough acceleration can
damage the coupling.
Speed up very gradually when traction is
poor, as in rain or snow. If you use too much
power, the drive wheels may spin. You could
lose control. If the drive wheels begin to
spin, take your foot off the accelerator.
2.2.2 Steering
Hold the steering wheel firmly with both
hands. Your hands should be on opposite
sides of the wheel. If you hit a curb or a
pothole (chuckhole), the wheel could pull
away from your hands unless you have a
firm hold.
2.2.3 Stopping
Push the brake pedal down gradually. The
amount of brake pressure you need to stop
the vehicle will depend on the speed of the
vehicle and how quickly you need to stop.
Control the pressure so the vehicle comes
to a smooth, safe stop. If you have a manual
transmission, push the clutch in when the
engine is close to idle.
2.2.4 Backing safely
Because you cannot see everything
behind your vehicle, backing is always
dangerous. Avoid backing whenever you
can. When you park, try to park so you will
be able to pull forward when you leave.
When you have to back, here are a few
simple safety rules:
· Start in the proper position.
· Look at your path.
· Use mirrors on both sides.
· Back slowly using the 4-way hazard
lights.
· Back and turn toward the driver's side
whenever possible.
· Use a helper whenever possible.
· Get out and look.
These rules are discussed in more detail
below.
Start in the Proper Position. Put the vehicle
in the best position to allow you to back
safely. This position will depend on the type
of backing to be done.
Look at Your Path. Look at your line of
travel before you begin. Get out and walk
around the vehicle. Check your clearance to
the sides and overhead, in and near the path
your vehicle will take.
Use Mirrors on Both Sides. Check the
outside mirrors on both sides frequently.
Get out of the vehicle and check your path if
you are unsure.
Back Slowly. Activate four-way hazard
lights before backing. Always back as slowly
as possible. Use the lowest reverse gear.
That way you can more easily correct any
steering errors. You can also stop quickly if
necessary.
COVER 43 CONTENTS
Back And Turn Toward The Driver's Side
So You Can See Better. Backing toward the
right side is very dangerous because you can't
see as well. If you back and turn toward the
driver's side, you can watch the rear of your
vehicle by looking out the side window. Use
driver-side backing even if it means going
around the block to put your vehicle in this
position. The added safety is worth it.
Use a Helper When You Can. There are
blind spots you can't see. That's why a helper
is important.
The helper should stand near the back of
your vehicle where you can see the helper.
Before you begin backing, work out a set
of hand signals that you both understand.
Agree on a signal for "stop."
Backing with a trailer
When backing a car, straight truck or bus,
you turn the top of the steering wheel
toward the direction you want to go. When
backing a trailer, you turn the steering
wheel in the opposite direction. Once the
trailer starts to turn, you must turn the
wheel the other way to follow the trailer.
Whenever you back with a trailer, try to
position your vehicle so you can back in a
straight line. If you must back on a curved
path, back to the driver's side so you can see.
Back Slowly. This will let you make
corrections before you get too far off course.
Use the Mirrors. The mirrors will help you
see whether the trailer is drifting to one side
or the other.
Correct Drift Immediately. As soon as you
see the trailer getting off the proper path,
correct it by turning the top of the steering
wheel in the direction of the drift.
Pull Forward (pull up). When backing
a trailer, straighten and reposition your
vehicle by pulling forward as needed. This
action is called a pull-up.
G.O.A.L. Get out and look if you are unsure
what is behind you.
Test your knowledge
1. Why should you back toward the driver's
side?
2. What is a pull-up?
3. If stopped on a hill, how can you start
moving without rolling back?
4. When backing, why is it important to use
a helper?
5. What is the most important hand signal
that you and the helper should agree on?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsection 2.2.
2.3 Shifting gears
Correct shifting of gears is important. If
you can't get your vehicle into the right gear
while driving, you will have less control.
2.3.1 Manual transmissions
basic method for shifting up
Most heavy vehicles with unsynchronized
manual transmissions require double
clutching to change gears. If equipped
with a synchronized manual transmission,
double clutching is NOT required. This is
the basic method:
1. Release the accelerator, push in the
clutch and shift to neutral at the same
time.
2. Release the clutch.
3. Let the engine and gears slow down to
the RPM required for the next gear (this
takes practice).
COVER 44 CONTENTS
4. Push in the clutch and shift to the higher
gear at the same time.
5. Release the clutch and press the
accelerator at the same time.
Shifting gears using double clutching
requires practice. If you remain too long
in neutral, you may have difficulty putting
the vehicle into the next gear. If so, don't
try to force it. Return to neutral, release the
clutch, increase the engine speed to match
the road speed and try again.
Knowing when to shift up
There are two ways of knowing when to
shift:
· Use Engine Speed (RPM). Study the
owner's manual for your vehicle and
learn the operating RPM range. Watch
your tachometer and shift up when your
engine reaches the top of the range.
(Some newer vehicles use "progressive"
shifting: the RPM at which you shift
becomes higher as you move up in the
gears. Find out what's right for the
vehicle you will operate.).
· Use Road Speed (MPH). Learn what
speeds each gear is good for. Then, by
using the speedometer, you'll know when
to shift up.
With either method, you may learn to use
engine sounds to know when to shift.
Basic procedures for shifting down
1. Release the accelerator, push in the
clutch and shift to neutral at the same
time.
2. Release the clutch.
3. Press the accelerator, increase the
engine and gear speed to the RPM
required in the lower gear.
4. Push in the clutch and shift to a lower
gear at the same time.
5. Release the clutch and press the
accelerator at the same time.
Downshifting, like upshifting, requires
knowing when to shift. Use either the
tachometer or the speedometer and
downshift at the right RPM or road speed.
Special conditions where you should
downshift are:
Before Starting Down a Hill. Slow down
and shift down to a speed that you can
control without using the brakes hard.
Otherwise the brakes can overheat and lose
their braking power.
Downshift before starting down the hill.
Make sure you are in a low enough gear,
usually lower than the gear required to
climb the same hill. Gear selection should
be based on the steepness of the grade,
weather, road conditions and your load.
Before Entering a Curve. Slow down to a
safe speed and downshift to the correct gear
before entering the curve. This lets you use
some power through the curve to help the
vehicle be more stable while turning. It also
lets you speed up as soon as you are out of
the curve.
2.3.2 Multi-speed rear axles
and auxiliary transmissions
Multi-speed rear axles and auxiliary
transmissions are used on many vehicles
to provide extra gears. You usually control
them by a selector knob or switch on the
gearshift lever of the main transmission.
There are many different shift patterns.
Learn the right way to shift gears in the
vehicle you will drive.
COVER 45 CONTENTS
2.3.3 Automatic transmissions
Some vehicles have automatic transmissions.
You can select a low range to get greater
engine braking when going down grades. The
lower ranges prevent the transmission from
shifting up beyond the selected gear (unless
the governor RPM is exceeded). It is very
important to use this braking effect when
going down grades.
2.3.4 Retarders
Some vehicles have retarders which help
slow a vehicle, reducing the need for using
your brakes. They reduce brake wear and
give you another way to slow down. There
are four basic types of retarders (exhaust,
engine, hydraulic, electric). All retarders
can be turned on or off by the driver. On
some vehicles, the retarding power can be
adjusted. When turned "on," retarders apply
their braking power (to the drive wheels only)
whenever you let up on the accelerator pedal
all the way.
Because these devices can be noisy, be sure
you know where their use is permitted.
CAUTION. When your drive wheels have
poor traction, the retarder can cause them
to skid. Therefore, you should turn the
retarder off whenever the road is wet, icy or
snow covered.
Test your knowledge.
1. What are the two special conditions
where you should downshift?
2. When should you downshift automatic
transmissions?
3. True or False? Retarders keep you from
skidding when the road is slippery.
4. What are the two ways to know when to
shift?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsection 2.3.
2.4 Seeing
To be a safe driver you need to know what's
going on all around your vehicle. Not
looking properly is a major cause of crashes.
2.4.1 Seeing ahead
All drivers look ahead; but many don't look
far enough ahead.
Importance of looking far enough ahead
Because stopping or changing lanes can take
a lot of distance, knowing what the traffic is
doing on all sides of you is very important.
You need to look well ahead to make sure
you have room to make these moves safely.
How far ahead to look
Most good drivers look 12 to 15 seconds
ahead. That means looking ahead the
distance you will travel in 12 to 15 seconds.
At lower speeds, that's about one block. At
highway speeds it's about a quarter of a mile.
If you're not looking that far ahead, you may
have to stop too quickly or make quick lane
changes. Looking 12 to 15 seconds ahead
doesn't mean not paying attention to things
that are closer. Good drivers shift their
attention back and forth, near and far.
Figure 2-6: How Far Ahead to Look.
COVER 46 CONTENTS
Check your vehicle
Use the mirrors to keep an eye on your
tires. It's one way to spot a tire fire. If
you're carrying open cargo, you can use the
mirrors to check it. Look for loose straps,
ropes or chains. Watch for a flapping or
ballooning tarp.
Special situations
Special situations require more than regular
mirror checks. These are lane changes,
turns, merges and tight maneuvers.
Lane changes
You need to check your mirror to make sure
no one is alongside you or about to pass you.
Check your mirrors:
· Before you change lanes to make sure
there is enough room.
· After you have signaled to make sure no
one has moved into your blind spot.
· Right after you start the lane change to
double-check that your path is clear.
· After you complete the lane change.
Turns
In turns, check your mirrors to make sure
the rear of your vehicle will not hit anything.
Merges
When merging, use your mirrors to make
sure the gap in traffic is large enough for
you to enter safely.
Tight maneuvers
Any time you are driving in close quarters
check your mirrors often. Make sure you
have enough clearance.
How to use mirrors
Use mirrors correctly by checking them
quickly and understanding what you see.
Look for traffic
Look for vehicles coming onto the highway,
into your lane or turning. Watch for brake
lights from slowing vehicles. By seeing these
things far enough ahead, you can change
your speed or change lanes, if necessary, to
avoid a problem.
Look ahead to traffic signals and signs. If a
light has been green for a long time, it will
probably change before you get there.
Start slowing down and be ready to stop.
2.4.2 Seeing to the
sides and rear
It is important to know what's going on
behind and to the sides. Check your mirrors
regularly. Check more often in special
situations.
Mirror adjustment
Mirror adjustment should be checked prior
to the start of any trip and can only be
checked accurately when the trailer(s) are
straight. You should check and adjust each
mirror to show some part of the vehicle.
This will give you a reference point for
judging the position of the other images.
Regular checks
You need to make regular checks of your
mirrors to be aware of traffic and to check
your vehicle.
Traffic
Check your mirrors for vehicles on either
side and behind you. In an emergency, you
may need to know whether you can make a
quick lane change. Use your mirrors to spot
overtaking vehicles. There are "blind spots"
that your mirrors cannot show you. Check
your mirrors regularly to know where other
vehicles are around you and to see if they
move into your blind spots.
COVER 47 CONTENTS
· Checking quickly. When you use your
mirrors while driving on the road, check
quickly. Look back and forth between the
mirrors and the road ahead. Don't focus
on the mirrors for too long. Otherwise,
you will travel quite a distance without
knowing what's happening ahead.
· Understanding what you see. Many
large vehicles have curved (convex, "fish
eye," "spot," "bug eye") mirrors that
show a wider area than flat mirrors. This
is often helpful. But everything appears
smaller in a convex mirror than it would
if you were looking at it directly. Things
also seem farther away than they really
are. It's important to realize this and to
allow for it.
Figure 2-7: Field of Vision Using a Convex
Mirror
FIELD OF VISION USING
A CONVEX MIRROR
Driver
Blind
Spot
Area
Plane
Mirror
View
Plane
Mirror
View
Convex
Mirror
View
Convex
Mirror
View
2.5 Communicating
Other drivers can't know what you are going
to do until you tell them.
2.5.1 Signal your intentions
Signaling what you intend to do is important
for safety. Here are some general rules for
signaling.
Turns
There are three good rules for using turn
signals:
1. Signal early. Signal well before you turn.
It is the best way to keep others from
trying to pass you.
2. Signal continuously. You need both hands
on the wheel to turn safely. Don't cancel
the signal until you have completed the
turn.
3. Cancel your signal. Don't forget to turn
off your turn signal after you've turned
(if you don't have self-canceling signals).
Lane changes
Put your turn signal on before changing
lanes. Change lanes slowly and smoothly.
That way a driver you didn't see may have a
chance to honk his/her horn or avoid your
vehicle.
Slowing down
Warn drivers behind you when you see
you'll need to slow down. A few light taps on
the brake pedal­enough to flash the brake
lights­should warn following drivers. Use
the four-way emergency flashers for times
when you are driving very slowly or are
stopped. Warn other drivers in any of the
following situations:
· Trouble Ahead. The size of your vehicle
may make it hard for drivers behind you
to see hazards ahead. If you see a hazard
COVER 48 CONTENTS
that will require slowing down, warn
the drivers behind you by flashing your
brake lights.
· Tight Turns. Most car drivers don't know
how slow you have to go to make a tight
turn in a large vehicle. Give drivers
behind you warning by braking early and
slowing gradually.
· Stopping on the Road. Truck and bus
drivers sometimes stop in the road to
unload cargo or passengers or to stop
at a railroad crossing. Warn following
drivers by flashing your brake lights.
Don't stop suddenly.
· Driving Slowly. Drivers often do not
realize how fast they are catching up to
a slow vehicle until they are very close.
If you must drive slowly, alert following
drivers by turning on your emergency
flashers if it is legal. (Laws regarding
the use of flashers differ from one state
to another. Check the laws of the states
where you will drive.).
Don't direct traffic
Some drivers try to help out others by
signaling when it is safe to pass. You should
not do this. You could cause a crash. You
could be blamed and it could cost you many
thousands of dollars.
2.5.2 Communicating
your presence
Other drivers may not notice your vehicle
even when it's in plain sight. Let them know
you're there to help prevent accidents.
When passing
Whenever you are about to pass a vehicle,
pedestrian or bicyclist, assume they don't
see you. They could suddenly move in front
of you. Drive carefully enough to avoid a
crash even if they don't see or hear you.
When it's hard to see
At dawn or dusk or in rain or snow, you
need to make yourself easier to see. If you
are having trouble seeing other vehicles,
other drivers will have trouble seeing you.
Turn on your lights. Use the headlights, not
just the identification or clearance lights.
Use the low beams; high beams can bother
people in the daytime as well as at night.
When parked at the side of the road
When you pull off the road and stop, be
sure to turn on the four-way emergency
flashers. This is important at night. Don't
trust the taillights to give warning. Drivers
have crashed into the rear of a parked
vehicle because they thought it was moving
normally.
If you must stop on a road or the shoulder
of any road, you must put out your
emergency warning devices within ten
minutes. Place your warning devices at the
following locations:
· If you stop on a two-lane road carrying
traffic in both directions or on an
undivided highway, place warning devices
within 10 feet of the front or rear corners
to mark the location of the vehicle and
100 feet behind and ahead of the vehicle,
on the shoulder or in the lane in which
you are stopped. See Figure 2-8.
· If you stop close to any hill, curve or
other obstruction that prevents other
drivers from seeing the vehicle within
500 feet, move the rear-most triangle to
a point back down the road so warning is
provided. See Figure 2-9.
COVER 49 CONTENTS
· If you must stop on or by a one-way or
divided highway, place warning devices
10 feet, 100 feet and 200 feet toward the
approaching traffic. See Figure 2-10.
When putting out the triangles, hold them
between yourself and the oncoming traffic
for your own safety so other drivers can
see you.
Use your horn when needed
Your horn can let others know you're there.
It can help to avoid a crash. Use your horn
when needed. However, it can startle
others and could be dangerous when used
unnecessarily.
Figure 2-8: Warning Device Placement:
Two Lane (traffic in both directions) or
Undivided Highway
Two Lane or Undivided Highway
Figure 2-9: Warning Device Placement:
Obstructed View
HILL
100' to
500'
10'
100'
100' to
500'
CURVE
10'
Figure 2-10: Warning Device Placement:
One Way or Divided Highway
100'
100'
10'
100'
100'
10'
100'
COVER 50 CONTENTS
2.6 Controlling speed
Driving too fast is a major cause of fatal
crashes. You must adjust your speed
depending on driving conditions. These
include traction, curves, visibility, traffic
and hills.
2.6.1 Stopping distance
There are three things that add up to total
stopping distance:
Perception Distance
+ Reaction Distance
+ Braking Distance
= Total Stopping Distance
Perception distance
The distance your vehicle travels in ideal
conditions from the time your eyes see
a hazard until your brain recognizes it.
Keep in mind certain mental and physical
conditions can affect your perception
distance. It can be affected greatly
depending on visibility and the hazard
itself. The average perception time for an
alert driver is 1¾ seconds. At 55 mph this
accounts for 142 feet traveled.
Reaction distance
The distance traveled from the time
your brain tells your foot to move from
the accelerator until your foot is actually
pushing the brake pedal. The average driver
has a reaction time of ¾ second to 1 second.
This accounts for an additional 61 feet
traveled at 55 mph.
Braking distance
The distance it takes to stop in ideal
conditions once the brakes are applied. At
55 mph on dry pavement with good brakes
it can take about 216 feet to stop.
Total stopping distance
The total minimum distance your vehicle
has traveled, in ideal conditions; with
everything considered, including perception
distance, reaction distance and braking
distance, until you can bring your vehicle to
a complete stop. At 55 mph, your vehicle will
travel a minimum of 419 feet.
The effect of speed on stopping
distance
The faster you drive, the greater the impact
or striking power of your vehicle. When
you double your speed from 20 to 40 mph
the impact is 4 times greater. The braking
distance is also 4 times longer. Triple the
speed from 20 to 60 mph and the impact
and braking distance is 9 times greater. At
60 mph, your stopping distance is greater
than the length of a football field. Increase
the speed to 80 mph and the impact and
braking distance are 16 times greater than
at 20 mph. High speeds greatly increase the
severity of crashes and stopping distances.
By slowing down, you can gain a lot in
reduced braking distance.
The effect of vehicle weight on
stopping distance
The heavier the vehicle, the more work the
brakes must do to stop it and the more heat
they absorb. But the brakes, tires, springs
and shock absorbers on heavy vehicles are
designed to work best when the vehicle is
fully loaded. Empty trucks require greater
stopping distances, because an empty
vehicle has less traction.
COVER 51 CONTENTS
2.6.2 Matching speed
to the road surface
You can't steer or brake a vehicle unless you
have traction. Traction is friction between
the tires and the road. There are some road
conditions that reduce traction and call for
lower speeds.
Slippery surfaces
It will take longer to stop and it will be
harder to turn without skidding when the
road is slippery. You must drive slower to
be able to stop in the same distance as on a
dry road. Wet roads can double stopping
distance. Reduce speed by about one third
(e.g., slow from 55 to about 35 mph) on a
wet road. On packed snow, reduce speed by
a half or more. If the surface is icy, reduce
speed to a crawl and stop driving as soon as
you can safely do so.
Identifying slippery surfaces
Sometimes it is hard to know if the road is
slippery. Here are some signs of slippery
roads:
· Shaded areas. Shady parts of the road
will remain icy and slippery long after
open areas have melted.
· Bridges. When the temperature drops,
bridges will freeze before the road
will. Be especially careful when the
temperature is close to 32 degrees
Fahrenheit.
· Melting ice. Slight melting will make ice
wet. Wet ice is much more slippery than
ice that is not wet.
· Black ice. Black ice is a thin layer that is
clear enough that you can see the road
underneath it. It makes the road look
wet. Any time the temperature is below
freezing and the road looks wet, watch
out for black ice.
· Vehicle icing. An easy way to check for ice
is to open the window and feel the front
of the mirror, mirror support or antenna.
If there's ice on these, the road surface is
probably starting to ice up, too.
· Just after rain begins. Right after it
starts to rain, the water mixes with
oil left on the road by vehicles. This
makes the road very slippery. If the rain
continues, it will wash the oil away.
· Hydroplaning. In some weather, water
or slush collects on the road. When this
happens, your vehicle can hydroplane.
It's like water skiing; the tires lose their
contact with the road and have little
or no traction. You may not be able to
steer or brake. You can regain control
by releasing the accelerator and pushing
in the clutch. This will slow your vehicle
and let the wheels turn freely. If the
vehicle is hydroplaning, do not use the
brakes to slow down. If the drive wheels
start to skid, push in the clutch to let
them turn freely.
It does not take a lot of water to cause
hydroplaning. Hydroplaning can occur at
speeds as low as 30 mph if there is a lot of
water. Hydroplaning is more likely if tire
pressure is low or the tread is worn. (The
grooves in a tire carry away the water; if
they aren't deep, they don't work well.)
Road surfaces where water can collect can
create conditions that cause a vehicle to
hydroplane. Watch for clear reflections, tire
splashes and raindrops on the road. These
are indications of standing water often deep
enough to cause hydroplaning.
COVER 52 CONTENTS
2.6.3 Speed and curves
Drivers must adjust their speed for curves
in the road. If you take a curve too fast, two
things can happen. The tires can lose their
traction and continue straight ahead, so you
skid off the road. Or the tires may keep their
traction and the vehicle rolls over. Tests
have shown that trucks with a high center
of gravity can roll over at the posted speed
limit for a curve.
Slow to a safe speed before you enter a
curve. Braking in a curve is dangerous
because it is easier to lock the wheels and
cause a skid. Slow down as needed. Don't
ever exceed the posted speed limit for
the curve. Be in a gear that will let you
accelerate slightly in the curve. This will
help you keep control.
2.6.4 Speed and distance ahead
You should always be able to stop within
the distance you can see ahead. Fog, rain or
other conditions may require that you slow
down to be able to stop within the distance
you can see. At night, you can't see as far
with low beams as you can with high beams.
When you must use low beams, slow down.
2.6.5 Speed and traffic flow
When you're driving in heavy traffic, the
safest speed is the speed of other vehicles.
Vehicles going the same direction at the
same speed are not likely to run into one
another. Drive at the speed of the traffic, if
you can, without going at an illegal or unsafe
speed. Keep a safe following distance.
The main reason drivers exceed speed
limits is to save time. But anyone trying to
drive faster than the speed of traffic will
not be able to save much time. The risks
involved are not worth it. If you go faster
than the speed of other traffic, you will
need to keep passing other vehicles. This
increases the chance of a crash and it is
more tiring. Fatigue increases the chance
of a crash. Going with the flow of traffic is
safer and easier.
2.6.6 Speed on downgrades
Your vehicle's speed will increase on
downgrades because of gravity. Your most
important objective is to select and maintain
a speed that is not too fast for the:
· Total weight of the vehicle and cargo.
· Length of the grade.
· Steepness of the grade.
· Road conditions.
· Weather.
If a speed limit is posted or there is a sign
indicating "Maximum Safe Speed," never
exceed the speed shown. Look for and
heed warning signs indicating the length
and steepness of the grade. You must use
the braking effect of the engine as the
principal way of controlling your speed on
downgrades. The braking effect of the engine
is greatest when it is near the governed
RPMs and the transmission is in the lower
gears. Save your brakes so you will be able to
slow or stop as required by road and traffic
conditions. Shift your transmission to a low
gear before starting down the grade and use
the proper braking techniques.
Carefully read Section 2.16: Mountain
Driving on going down long, steep
downgrades safely.
COVER 53 CONTENTS
2.6.7 Roadway work zones
Speeding traffic is the number one cause
of injury and death in roadway work zones.
Observe the posted speed limits at all times
when approaching and driving through
a work zone. Watch your speedometer,
and don't allow your speed to creep up
as you drive through long sections of
road construction. Decrease your speed
for adverse weather or road conditions.
Decrease your speed even further when a
worker is close to the roadway.
Test your knowledge
1. How far ahead should you look?
2. What are two main things to look for
ahead?
3. What's your most important way to see
the sides and rear of your vehicle?
4. What does "communicating" mean in
safe driving?
5. Where should your reflectors be placed
when stopped on a divided highway?
6. What three things add up to total
stopping distance?
7. If you go twice as fast, will your stopping
distance increase by two or four times?
8. True or False? Empty trucks have the
best braking.
9. What is hydroplaning?
10.What is "black ice?"
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 2.4, 2.5 and 2.6.
2.7 Managing space
To be a safe driver, you need space all around
your vehicle. When things go wrong, space
gives you time to think and take action.
To have space available when something
goes wrong, you need to manage space.
While this is true for all drivers, it is very
important for large vehicles. They take up
more space and they require more space for
stopping and turning.
2.7.1 Space ahead
Of all the space around your vehicle, it is the
area ahead of the vehicle­the space you're
driving into­that is most important.
The need for space ahead
You need space ahead in case you must
suddenly stop. According to crash reports,
the vehicle that trucks and buses most
often run into is the one in front of them.
The most frequent cause is following too
closely. Remember, if the vehicle ahead of
you is smaller than yours, it can probably
stop faster than you can. You may crash if
you are following too closely.
How much space?
How much space should you keep in front
of you? One good rule says you need at least
one second for each 10 feet of vehicle length
at speeds below 40 mph. At greater speeds,
you must add one second for safety. For
example, if you are driving a 40-foot vehicle,
you should leave 4 seconds between you and
the vehicle ahead. In a 60-foot rig, you'll
need 6 seconds. Over 40 mph, you'd need 5
seconds for a 40-foot vehicle and 7 seconds
for a 60-foot vehicle.
To know how much space you have, wait
until the vehicle ahead passes a shadow
COVER 54 CONTENTS
on the road, a pavement marking or some
other clear landmark. Then count off the
seconds like this: "one thousand-and-one,
one thousand-and-two" and so on, until you
reach the same spot. Compare your count
with the rule of one second for every 10 feet
of length.
If you are driving a 40 foot truck and only
counted up to 2 seconds, you're too close.
Drop back a little and count again until you
have 4 seconds of following distance (or 5
seconds, if you're going over 40 mph). After
a little practice, you will know how far back
you should be. Remember to add one second
for speeds above 40 mph. Also remember
that when the road is slippery, you need
much more space to stop.
Figure 2-11: Heavy Vehicle Formula
40 foot truck = 4 seconds
(under 40 MPH)
HEAVY VEHICLE FORMULA
For timed interval following distance.
· 1 second required for each 10 feet of
vehicle length at speeds under 40 MPH.
· Above 40 MPH use same formula, then
add 1 second for the additional speed.
50 foot truck = 5 seconds
(under 40 MPH)
60 foot truck = 6 seconds
(under 40 MPH)
2.7.2 Space behind
You can't stop others from following you too
closely. But there are things you can do to
make it safer.
Stay to the right
Heavy vehicles are often tailgated when they
can't keep up with the speed of traffic. This
often happens when you're going uphill. If
a heavy load is slowing you down, stay in
the right lane if you can. Going uphill, you
should not pass another slow vehicle unless
you can get around it quickly and safely.
Dealing with tailgaters safely
In a large vehicle, it's often hard to see
whether a vehicle is close behind you. You
may be tailgated:
· When you are traveling slowly. Drivers
trapped behind slow vehicles often follow
closely.
· In bad weather. Many car drivers
follow large vehicles closely during bad
weather, especially when it is hard to see
the road ahead.
If you find yourself being tailgated, here
are some things you can do to reduce the
chances of a crash:
· Avoid quick changes. If you have to slow
down or turn, signal early and reduce
speed gradually.
· Increase your following distance.
Opening up room in front of you will help
you avoid having to make sudden speed
or direction changes. It also makes it
easier for the tailgater to get around you.
· Don't speed up. It's safer to be tailgated at
a low speed than a high speed.
· Avoid tricks. Don't turn on your
taillights or flash your brake lights.
Follow the suggestions above.
COVER 55 CONTENTS
2.7.3 Space to the sides
Commercial vehicles are often wide and take
up most of a lane. Safe drivers will manage
what little space they have. You can do this
by keeping your vehicle centered in your lane
and avoiding driving alongside others.
Staying centered in a lane
You need to keep your vehicle centered in
the lane to keep safe clearance on either
side. If your vehicle is wide, you have little
room to spare.
Traveling next to others
There are two dangers in traveling alongside
other vehicles:
· Another driver may change lanes
suddenly and turn into you.
· You may be trapped when you need to
change lanes.
Find an open spot where you aren't near
other traffic. When traffic is heavy, it may be
hard to find an open spot. If you must travel
near other vehicles, try to keep as much space
as possible between you and them. Also, drop
back or pull forward so that you are sure the
other driver can see you.
Strong winds
Strong winds make it difficult to stay in
your lane. The problem is usually worse
for lighter vehicles. This problem can be
especially bad coming out of tunnels. Don't
drive alongside others if you can avoid it.
2.7.4 Space overhead
Hitting overhead objects is a danger. Make
sure you always have overhead clearance.
Don't assume that the heights posted at
bridges and overpasses are correct. Re-
paving or packed snow may have reduced the
clearances since the heights were posted.
The weight of a cargo van changes its height.
An empty van is higher than a loaded one.
If you got under a bridge when you were
loaded, that does not necessarily mean you
can do it when you are empty.
If you doubt you have safe space to pass
under an object, go slowly. If you aren't
sure you can make it, take another route.
Warnings are often posted on low bridges or
underpasses, but sometimes they are not.
Some roads can cause a vehicle to tilt. There
can be a problem clearing objects along
the edge of the road, such as signs, trees or
bridge supports. Where this is a problem,
drive a little closer to the center of the road.
Before you back into an area, get out and
look for overhanging objects, such as trees,
branches or electric wires. It's easy to miss
seeing them while you are backing. Also
check for other hazards at the same time.
2.7.5 Space below
Many drivers forget about the space under
their vehicles. That space can be very
small when a vehicle is heavily loaded.
This is often a problem on dirt roads and
in unpaved yards where the surface can
wear away. Don't take a chance on getting
hung up. Drainage channels across roads
can cause the end of some vehicles to drag.
Cross such depressions carefully.
Railroad tracks can also cause problems,
particularly when pulling trailers with a low
underneath clearance. Don't take a chance
on getting hung up halfway across.
COVER 56 CONTENTS
2.7.6 Space for turns
The space around a truck or bus is
important in turns. Because of wide turning
and offtracking, large vehicles can hit other
vehicles or objects during turns.
Right turns
Here are some rules to help prevent right-
turn crashes:
· Turn slowly to give yourself and others
more time to avoid problems.
· If you are driving a truck or bus that
cannot make the right turn without
swinging into another lane, turn wide
as you complete the turn, as shown in
Figure 2-12. Keep the rear of your vehicle
close to the curb. This will stop other
drivers from passing you on the right.
· Don't turn wide to the left as you start
the turn, as shown in Figure 2-13. A
following driver may think you are
turning left and try to pass you on the
right. You may crash into the other
vehicle as you complete your turn.
· If you must cross into the oncoming
lane to make a turn, watch out for
vehicles coming toward you. Give them
room to go by or to stop. Don't back
up for them, because you might hit
someone behind you.
Figure 2-12: Correct
Figure 2-13: Incorrect
Left turns
On a left turn, make sure you have reached
the center of the intersection before you
start the left turn. If you turn too soon, the
left side of your vehicle may hit another
vehicle because of offtracking.
After you have completed your turn, move
into the right most traffic lane when traffic
is clear. See Figure 2-14.
If there are two turning lanes, always take
the right-hand turn lane, as shown in Figure
2-15. Don't start in the inside lane because
you may have to swing right to make the
turn. Drivers on your left can be more
readily seen.
COVER 57 CONTENTS
Circular intersections
Roundabouts. Depending on the number
of lanes, roundabouts are designed with
an average outside diameter of 120­250.
Roundabouts are designed to keep speeds
low at all times: on entry, when circulating
around the roundabout and when exiting.
· Single-lane entry is the simplest type,
consisting of just one lane.
· Truck aprons are often part of single-lane
entries to accommodate off-tracking
of turning trucks or to allow oversize-
overweight vehicles.
Generally, there are two types of pavement
marking at the approach to a two-lane
roundabout. (Figures 2.16 a-f)
Large traffic circles or rotaries. Typically
found in the eastern part of the U.S., these
larger circles are usually 600 to 800 feet in
diameter.
Typical features:
· Signed and marked to require vehicles on
the circle to yield to those entering the
circle.
· Allow speeds of 35­50 mph.
· Allow large trucks easier entry and
navigation around the circle.
· There may be a large park area in the
center with some parking allowed on the
inside edge of the circle.
Since they were originally installed, traffic
volume has increased greatly, and large
traffic circles have become more of a safety
hazard. Some are being replaced with other
types of intersection control like the smaller,
safer, more efficient roundabout.
Figure 2-14: Turn into the lane closest to
the lane from which you came. Allow for
offtracking if your vehicle is long. Return to
right-most traffic lane when safe and traffic
permits. Don't return to the right lane at or
near other intersections.
Long Veh
icles
(Trailer Off Tr
acking)
Figure 2-15: If there are two left turn lanes,
use the right-hand lane.
(Trailer Off Tr
acking)
ONLY
ONLY
COVER 58 CONTENTS
Small mini traffic circles. These are
typically found in residential areas
(neighborhoods) of a community.
Typical features:
· Rather small raised curb islands, 10­50
feet in diameter found in the middle of a
4-legged intersection.
· Stop signs usually found on two or
possibly all four legs of the intersection.
· Very unfriendly for large trucks to make
turns or go through the intersection or
for full-sized snowplows.
Figure 2-16a: Single white pavement
marking separating entry lanes. WIS 30 and
Thompson Drive in Madison.
· A large truck is expected to straddle the
lanes to make a right turn, a left turn or
a through movement.
· Generally, truckers will protect the right
side of their vehicle by not allowing other
autos to drive on their right (blind) side.
Figure 2-16b: Occasional entry with double
white lines separating entry lanes. STH 35
and Hanley Road near Hudson.
· A large truck is expected to stay in its
lane when approaching the roundabout.
· Trucks turning right
 Should keep the tractor to the left of
the double white lines and straddle
the double white lines without
crossing into the left lane. This allows
off-tracking to the right side as the
turn is completed.
· Trucks turning left
 Should keep the tractor to the far left
side of the left lane and double white
lines. As the tractor moves forward,
the trailer will off-track to the right
and use the space between the white
lines. Moving into the roundabout,
the tractor should stay in the left lane
while the trailer will off-track onto
the truck apron.
COVER 59 CONTENTS
· Trucks making a through movement
from the right lane
 Should keep the tractor to the left
side of the double white lines at entry.
As the truck pulls forward, drive the
tractor to the far right or outside of
the circle.
· Trucks making a through movement
from the left lane
 Should keep the tractor to the left
side of the left lane and allow the
trailer to off- track into the double
white line area at entry. As the truck
pulls forward, keep the tractor within
the inside lane and allow the trailer
to off-track onto the truck apron.
Figure 2-16c: Lane separation, single line,
left turn
Legend
front tractor tires
rear trailer tires
· Semi is traveling from right to left with
a single white line between the lanes at
entry.
 The semi makes a left turn by
straddling the lanes or encroaching
into the adjacent lane on the right.
 It does so at the entry and also while
driving through the roundabout,
using the truck apron for off-
tracking.
Figure 2-16d: Lane separation, wide gore,
left turn
Legend
front tractor tires
rear trailer tires
· Semi is traveling from right to left with
double white lines between the lanes at
entry.
 The semi makes a left turn by driving
the tractor to the far left while
staying in-lane.
 The semi trailer uses the area
between the double white lines for
off-tracking at entry; it uses the truck
apron for off-tracking while driving
through the roundabout.
Figure 2-16e: Lane separation, wide gore,
right turn
Legend
front tractor tires
rear trailer tires
COVER 60 CONTENTS
· Semi is traveling from right to left;
double white lines separate the lanes
at entry.
· Semi is making a right turn by driving
to the left side of the double white lines,
staying in-lane to swing wide and make
the turn without running over the
outside of the curb.
Figure 2-16f: Lane separations, wide gore,
through movement.
Legend
front tractor tires
rear trailer tires
· Semi is traveling from the right toward
the left; double white lines separate the
lanes at entry.
· Semi is making a through movement
from the right lane, so it must drive to
the left side of the double white lines at
entry, while staying in-lane.
· As the semi pulls forward, the driver
should drive to the far right­outside of
the circle. This will reduce off-tracking
into the left lane.
· Some roundabout designs have an
outside lane wide enough to allow the
truck to stay in-lane.
2.7.7 Space needed to
cross or enter traffic
Be aware of the size and weight of your
vehicle when you cross or enter traffic. Here
are some important things to keep in mind:
· Because of slow acceleration and the
space large vehicles require, you may
need a much larger gap to enter traffic
than you would in a car.
· Acceleration varies with the load. Allow
more room if your vehicle is heavily
loaded.
· Before you start across a road, make sure
you can get all the way across before
traffic reaches you.
2.8 Seeing hazards
2.8.1 Importance of
seeing hazards
What is a hazard?
A hazard is any road condition or other road
user (driver, bicyclist, pedestrian) that is a
possible danger. For example, a car in front
of you is headed towards the freeway exit,
but his brake lights come on and he begins
braking hard. This could mean the driver
is uncertain about taking the off-ramp. He
might suddenly return to the highway. This
car is a hazard. If the driver of the car cuts
in front of you, it is no longer just a hazard;
it is an emergency.
Seeing hazards lets you be prepared
You will have more time to act if you see
hazards before they become emergencies. In
the example above, you might make a lane
change or slow down to prevent a crash if
the car suddenly cuts in front of you. Seeing
this hazard gives you time to check your
mirrors and signal a lane change. Being
prepared reduces the danger. A driver who
COVER 61 CONTENTS
did not see the hazard until the slow car
pulled back on the highway in front of him
would have to do something very suddenly.
Sudden braking or a quick lane change is
much more likely to lead to a crash.
Learning to see hazards
There are often clues that will help you see
hazards. The more you drive, the better
you can get at seeing hazards. This section
will talk about hazards of which you should
be aware.
Move-over laws
The incidents of law enforcement
officers, emergency medical services,
fire department personnel and people
working on the road are being struck while
performing duties at the roadside are
increasing at a frightening pace. To lessen
the problem, move-over laws have been
enacted that require drivers to slow and
change lanes when approaching a roadside
incident. Signs are posted on roadways in
states that have such laws.
When approaching law enforcement or other
emergency vehicles stopped on or near a
roadway in Wisconsin and using flashing
emergency lights, you must proceed with
caution and yield the right of way by making
a lane change into a lane not next to that
of the emergency vehicle(s) until you have
safely passed the stopped vehicle(s), if safety
and traffic conditions permit. If a lane
change is unsafe, slow down and proceed
with caution until you have safely passed
the stopped vehicle(s).
2.8.2 Hazardous roads
Slow down and be very careful if you see
any of the following road hazards:
Work zones
When people are working on the road, it is a
hazard. There may be narrower lanes, sharp
turns or uneven surfaces. Other drivers
are often distracted and drive in an unsafe
manner. Workers and construction vehicles
may get in the way. Drive slowly and
carefully near work zones. Use your four-
way flashers or brake lights to warn drivers
behind you.
Drop-off
Sometimes the pavement drops off sharply
near the edge of the road. Driving too near
the edge can tilt your vehicle toward the
side of the road. This can cause the top of
your vehicle to hit roadside objects (signs,
tree limbs). Also, it can be hard to steer as
you cross the drop-off, going off the road or
coming back on.
Foreign objects
Things that have fallen on the road can be
hazards. They can be a danger to your tires
and wheel rims. They can damage electrical
and brake lines. They can be caught between
dual tires and cause severe damage. Some
obstacles which appear to be harmless can
be very dangerous. For example, cardboard
boxes may be empty, but they may also
contain some solid or heavy material capable
of causing damage. The same is true of paper
and cloth sacks. It is important to remain
alert for objects of all sorts, so you can see
them early enough to avoid them without
making sudden, unsafe moves.
COVER 62 CONTENTS
Off-ramps/on-ramps
Freeway and turnpike exits can be
particularly dangerous for commercial
vehicles. Off-ramps and on-ramps often
have speed limit signs posted. Remember,
these speeds may be safe for automobiles,
but may not be safe for larger
vehicles or heavily loaded vehicles.
Exits that go downhill and turn at the
same time can be especially dangerous.
The downgrade makes it difficult to reduce
speed. Braking and turning at the same
time can be dangerous. Make sure you are
going slow enough before you get on the
curved part of an off-ramp or on-ramp.
2.8.3 Drivers who are hazards
In order to protect yourself and others,
you must know when other drivers may do
something hazardous. Some clues to this
type of hazard are discussed below:
Blocked vision
People who can't see others are dangerous.
Be alert for drivers whose vision is blocked.
Vans, loaded station wagons and cars with
the rear window blocked are examples.
Rental trucks should be watched carefully.
Their drivers are often not used to the
limited vision they have to the sides and
rear of the truck. In winter, vehicles with
frosted, ice-covered or snow-covered
windows are hazards.
Vehicles may be partly hidden by blind
intersections or alleys. If you can only see
the rear or front end of a vehicle but not the
driver, then he or she can't see you. Be alert
because he/she may back out or enter into
your lane. Always be prepared to stop.
Delivery trucks can present a hazard
The driver's vision is often blocked by
packages or vehicle doors. Drivers of step
vans, postal vehicles and local delivery
vehicles often are in a hurry and may
suddenly step out of their vehicle or drive
their vehicle into the traffic lane.
Parked vehicles can be hazards
People may start to get out. Or the vehicle
may suddenly start up and drive into your
way. Watch for movement inside the vehicle
or movement of the vehicle itself that shows
people are inside. Watch for brake lights or
backup lights, exhaust and other clues that a
driver is about to move.
Be careful of a stopped bus
Passengers may cross in front of or behind
the bus and they often can't see you.
Pedestrians and bicyclists can be
hazards
Walkers, joggers and bicyclists may be on the
road with their back to traffic, so they can't
see you. Sometimes they wear head-phones
so they can't hear you either. This can be
dangerous. On rainy days, pedestrians may
not see you because of hats or umbrellas.
They may be hurrying to get out of the rain
and may not pay attention to traffic.
Distractions
People who are distracted are hazards. Watch
where they are looking. If they are looking
elsewhere, they can't see you. But be alert
even when they are looking at you. They may
believe that they have the right of way.
Children
Children tend to act quickly without
checking traffic. Children playing with one
another may not look for traffic and are a
serious hazard.
COVER 63 CONTENTS
Talkers
Drivers or pedestrians talking to one
another may not be paying close attention to
the traffic.
Workers
People working on or near the roadway are a
hazard clue. The work creates a distraction
for other drivers and the workers themselves
may not see you.
Ice cream truck
Someone selling ice cream is a hazard clue.
Children may be nearby and may not see
you.
Disabled vehicle
Drivers changing a tire or fixing an engine
often do not pay attention to roadway
traffic. They are often careless. Jacked up
wheels or raised hoods are hazard clues.
Crashes
Accidents are particularly hazardous.
People involved in the crash may not look
for traffic. Passing drivers tend to look at
the crash. People often run across the road
without looking. Vehicles may slow or stop
suddenly.
Shoppers
People in and around shopping areas are
often not watching traffic because they
are looking for stores or looking into store
windows.
Confused drivers
Confused drivers often change direction
suddenly or stop without warning.
Confusion is common near freeway
or turnpike interchanges and major
intersections. Tourists unfamiliar with the
area can be hazardous. Clues to tourists
include car-top luggage and out-of-state
license plates. Unexpected actions (stopping
in the middle of a block, changing lanes for
no apparent reason, backup lights suddenly
going on) are clues to confusion. Hesitation
is another clue, including driving very
slowly, using brakes often or stopping in the
middle of an intersection. You may also see
drivers who are looking at street signs, maps
and house numbers. These drivers may not
be paying attention to you.
Slow drivers
Motorists who fail to maintain normal speed
are hazards. Seeing slow-moving vehicles
early can prevent a crash. Some vehicles,
by their nature, are slow and seeing them
is a hazard clue (mopeds, farm machinery,
construction machinery, tractors, etc.) Some
of these will have the "slow-moving vehicle"
symbol to warn you. This is a red triangle
with an orange center. Watch for it.
Drivers signaling a turn may be a
hazard
They may slow more than expected or stop.
If they are making a tight turn into an alley
or driveway, they may go very slowly. If they
are blocked by pedestrians or other vehicles,
they may need to stop on the roadway.
Vehicles turning left may need to stop for
oncoming vehicles.
Drivers in a hurry
Drivers may feel your commercial vehicle
is preventing them from getting where they
want to go on time. Such drivers may pass
you without a safe gap in the oncoming
traffic, cutting too close in front of you.
Drivers entering the road may pull in front
of you in order to avoid being stuck behind
you, causing you to brake. Be aware of this
and watch for drivers who are in a hurry.
COVER 64 CONTENTS
Impaired drivers
Drivers who are sleepy, have had too much
to drink, are on drugs or who are ill are
hazards. Some clues to these drivers are:
· Weaving across the road or drifting from
one side to another.
· Leaving the road (dropping the right
wheels onto the shoulder or bumping
across a curb in a turn).
· Stopping at the wrong time (stopping at
a green light or waiting too long at a stop
sign).
· An open window in cold weather.
· Speeding up or slowing down suddenly,
driving too fast or too slowly.
Be especially alert for drunk drivers and
sleepy drivers late at night.
Driver body movement as a clue
Drivers look in the direction they are going
to turn. You may sometimes get a clue from
a driver's head and body movements that
the driver may be going to make a turn
even though the turn signals aren't on.
Drivers making over-the-shoulder checks
may be going to change lanes. These clues
are most easily seen in motorcyclists and
bicyclists. Watch other road users and try
to tell whether they might do something
hazardous.
Conflicts
You are in conflict when you need to change
speed and/or direction to avoid hitting
someone. Conflicts occur at intersections
where vehicles meet, at merges (such as
turnpike on-ramps) and where there are
needed lane changes (such as the end of
a lane, forcing a move to another lane
of traffic). Other situations include slow
moving or stalled traffic in a traffic lane and
crash scenes. Watch for other drivers who
are in conflict because they are a hazard to
you. When they react to this conflict, they
may do something that will put them in
conflict with you.
2.8.4 Always have a plan
You should always be looking for hazards.
Continue to learn to see hazards on
the road. Don't forget why you are
looking for hazards­they may turn into
emergencies. You look for hazards in
order to have time to plan a way out of
any emergency. When you see a hazard,
think about the emergencies that could
develop and figure out what you would do.
Always be prepared to take action based
on your plans. In this way, you will be a
prepared, defensive driver who will improve
not only your own safety but also the safety
of all road users.
Test your knowledge
1. How do you find out how many seconds
of following distance space you have?
2. If you are driving a 30-foot vehicle at
55 mph, how many seconds of following
distance should you allow?
3. True or False? You should decrease
your following distance if somebody is
following you too closely.
4. True or False? If you swing wide to the
left before turning right, another driver
may try to pass you on the right.
5. What is a hazard?
6. Why make emergency plans when you
see a hazard?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 2.7 and 2.8.
COVER 65 CONTENTS
2.9 Distracted driving
A driver distraction is anything that
takes your attention away from driving.
Whenever you are driving a vehicle and
your full attention is not on the driving
task, you are putting yourself, your
passengers, other vehicles, and pedestrians
in danger. Distracted driving can cause
collisions, resulting in injury, death or
property damage.
Activities inside of the vehicle that can
distract your attention include: talking to
passengers; adjusting the radio, CD player
or climate controls; eating, drinking or
smoking; reading maps or other literature;
picking up something that fell; talking on a
cell phone or CB radio; reading or sending
text messages; using any type of electronic
device (such as navigation systems, pagers,
personal digital assistant, computers, etc.);
day dreaming or being occupied with other
mental distractions; and many others.
Possible distractions that could occur outside
a moving vehicle: outside traffic, vehicles or
pedestrians; outside events such as police
pulling someone over or a crash scene;
sunlight/sunset; objects in roadway; road
construction; reading billboards or other
road advertisements; and many others.
2.9.1 The distracted
driving crash problem
The Large Truck Crash Causation Study
(LTCCS) reported that 8 percent of large-
truck crashes occurred when Commercial
Motor Vehicle (CMV) drivers were
externally distracted and 2 percent of large
truck crashes occurred when the driver was
internally distracted.
Approximately 5,500 people are killed each
year on U.S. roadways and an estimated
448,000 are injured in motor vehicle crashes
involving distracted driving (NHTSA Traffic
Safety Facts: Distracted Driving).
Research indicates that the burden of talking
on a cell phone­even if it's hands-free­saps
the brain of 39% of the energy it would
ordinarily devote to safe driving. Drivers who
use a hand-held device are more likely to get
into a crash serious enough to cause injury.
(NHTSA distracted driving)
2.9.2 Effects of
distracted driving
Effects of distracted driving include slowed
perception, which may cause you to be
delayed in perceiving or completely fail to
perceive an important traffic event; delayed
decision making and improper action, which
can cause you to be delayed in taking the
proper action or make incorrect inputs to
the steering, accelerator or brakes.
2.9.3 Types of distractions
There are many causes of distraction, all
with the potential to increase risk.
· Physical distraction­one that causes
you to take your hands off the wheel or
eyes off the road, such as reaching for an
object.
· Mental distraction­activities that take
your mind away from the road, such
as engaging in conversation with a
passenger or thinking about something
that happened during the day.
· Both physical and mental
distraction­even greater chance a
crash could happen, such as talking on
a cell phone; or sending or reading text
messages.
COVER 66 CONTENTS
2.9.4 Cell/mobile phones
49 CFR Part 383, 384, 390, 391 and
392 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Regulations (FMCSRs) and the Hazardous
Materials Regulations (HMR) restricts
the use of hand-held mobile telephones
by drivers of commercial motor vehicles
(CMVs); and implements new driver
disqualification sanctions for drivers
of CMVs who fail to comply with this
Federal restriction; or who have multiple
convictions for violating a State or local law
or ordinance on motor vehicle traffic control
that restricts the use of hand-held mobile
telephones. Additionally, motor carriers
are prohibited from requiring or allowing
drivers of CMVs to use hand-held mobile
telephones.
The use of hand-held mobile telephones
means, "using at least one hand to hold
a mobile telephone to conduct a voice
communication"; "dialing a mobile
telephone by pressing more than a single
button"; or "moving from a seated driving
position while restrained by a seat belt to
reach for a mobile telephone." If you choose
to use a mobile phone while operating a
CMV, you may only use a hands free mobile
phone that is located close to you and that
can be operated in compliance with the rule
to conduct a voice communication.
Your CDL will be disqualified after two or
more convictions of any state law on hand-
held mobile telephone use while operating
a CMV. Disqualification is 60 days for the
second offense within 3 years and 120 days
for three or more offenses within 3 years.
In addition, the first and each subsequent
violation of such a prohibition are subject
to civil penalties imposed on such drivers,
in an amount up to $2,750. Motor carriers
must not allow nor require drivers to
use a hand-held mobile telephone while
driving. Employers may also be subject to
civil penalties in an amount up to $11,000.
There is an emergency exception that
allows you to use your hand-held mobile
telephones if necessary to communicate
with law enforcement officials or other
emergency services.
Research shows that the odds of being
involved in a safety-critical event (e.g.,
crash, near-crash, unintentional lane
deviation) is 6 times greater for CMV
drivers who engage in dialing a mobile
telephone while driving than for those who
do not. Dialing drivers took their eyes off
the forward roadway for an average of 3.8
seconds. At 55 mph (or 80.7 feet per second),
this equates to a driver traveling 306 feet,
the approximate length of a football field,
without looking at the roadway.
Your primary responsibility is to operate a
motor vehicle safely. To do this, you must
focus your full attention on the driving task.
Note that hands-free devices are no less
likely than hand-held cell phones to cause
you to become distracted. Attention is
diverted from the driving task while using
either device.
2.9.5 Texting
49 CFR Part 383, 384, 390, 391, 392, the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations
(FMCSR) prohibits texting by commercial
motor vehicle (CMV) drivers while operating
in interstate commerce; and implements
new driver disqualification sanctions for
drivers of CMVs who fail to comply with this
Federal prohibition; or who have multiple
COVER 67 CONTENTS
convictions for violating a State or local
law or ordinance on motor vehicle traffic
control that prohibits texting while driving.
Additionally, motor carriers are prohibited
from requiring or allowing their drivers to
engage in texting while driving.
Texting means manually entering text
into, or reading text from, an electronic
device. This includes, but is not limited to,
short message service, e-mailing, instant
messaging, a command or request to access
a World Wide Web page, or engaging in any
other form of electronic text retrieval or
entry, for present or future communication.
Electronic device includes, but is not limited
to, a cellular telephone; personal digital
assistant; pager; computer; or any other
device used to enter, write, send, receive, or
read text.
Your CDL will be disqualified after two or
more convictions of any state law on texting
while operating a CMV. Disqualification
is 60 days for the second offense within
3 years and 120 days for three or more
offenses within 3 years. In addition, the
first and each subsequent violation of such
a prohibition are subject to civil penalties
imposed on such drivers, in an amount
up to $2,750. No motor carrier shall allow
or require its drivers to engage in texting
while driving. There is an emergency
exception that allows you text if necessary to
communicate with law enforcement officials
or other emergency services.
Evidence suggests that text messaging is
even riskier than talking on a cell phone
because it requires you to look at a small
screen and manipulate the keypad with
one's hands. Texting is the most alarming
distraction because it involves both physical
and mental distraction simultaneously.
Research shows that the odds of being
involved in a safety-critical event (e.g., crash,
near-crash, unintentional lane deviation)
is 23.2 times greater for CMV drivers who
engage in texting while driving than for
those who do not. Sending or receiving text
takes your eyes from the road for an average
of 4.6 seconds. At 55 mph, you would travel
371 feet, or the length of an entire football
field­without looking at the roadway.
2.9.6 Don't drive distracted
Your goal should be to eliminate all in-
vehicle distractions before driving begins.
Accomplishing this goal can be done by:
· Assessing all potential in-vehicle
distractions before driving
· Developing a preventative plan to reduce/
eliminate possible distractions
· Expecting distractions to occur
· Discussing possible scenarios before
getting behind the wheel
Based on the assessment of potential
distractions, you can formulate a
preventative plan to reduce/eliminate
possible distractions.
If drivers react a half-second slower because
of distractions, crashes double. Some tips to
follow so you won't become distracted:
· Turn off all communication devices.
· If you must use a mobile phone, make
sure it is within close proximity that it
is operable while you are restrained,
use an earpiece or the speaker phone
function, use voice-activated dialing, use
the hands-free feature. Drivers are not
in compliance if they reach for a mobile
phone, even if they intend to use the
hands-free function.
COVER 68 CONTENTS
· Do not type or read a text message on a
mobile device while driving.
· Familiarize yourself with your vehicle's
features and equipment, before you get
behind the wheel.
· Adjust all vehicle controls and mirrors to
your preferences prior to driving.
· Pre-program radio stations and pre-load
your favorite CDs.
· Clear the vehicle of any unnecessary
objects and secure cargo.
· Review maps, program the GPS and plan
your route before you begin driving.
· Don't attempt to read or write while you
drive.
· Avoid smoking, eating and drinking
while you drive. Leave early to allow
yourself time to stop to eat.
· Don't engage in complex or emotionally
intense conversations with other
occupants.
· Secure commitment from other
occupants to behave responsibly and
to support the driver in reducing
distractions.
2.9.7 Watch out for other
distracted drivers
You need to be able to recognize other
drivers who are engaged in any form of
driving distraction. Not recognizing other
distracted drivers can prevent you from
perceiving or reacting correctly in time to
prevent a crash. Watch for:
· Vehicles that may drift over the lane
divider lines or within their own lane.
· Vehicles traveling at inconsistent speeds.
· Drivers who are preoccupied with maps,
food, cigarettes, cell phones, or other
objects.
· Drivers who appear to be involved in
conversations with their passengers.
Give a distracted driver plenty of room and
maintain your safe following distance.
Be very careful when passing a driver who
seems to be distracted. The other driver
may not be aware of your presence, and may
drift in front of you.
2.10 Aggressive
drivers/road rage
2.10.1 What is it?
Aggressive driving and road rage are not
new problems. However, in today's world,
where heavy and slow-moving traffic and
tight schedules are the norm, more and
more drivers are taking out their anger and
frustration in their vehicles.
Crowded roads leave little room for error,
leading to suspicion and hostility among
drivers and encouraging them to take
personally the mistakes of other drivers.
Aggressive driving is the act of operating
a motor vehicle in a selfish, bold, or pushy
manner, without regard for the rights
or safety of others (i.e. changing lanes
frequently and abruptly without notice).
Road rage is operating a motor vehicle
with the intent of doing harm to others or
physically assaulting a driver or their vehicle.
2.10.2 Don't be an
aggressive driver
How you feel before you start your vehicle
has a lot to do with how stress will affect
you while driving.
COVER 69 CONTENTS
· Reduce your stress before and while you
drive. Listen to "easy listening" music.
· Give the drive your full attention. Don't
allow yourself to become distracted by
talking on your cell phone, eating, etc.
· Be realistic about your travel time. Expect
delays because of traffic, construction, or
bad weather and make allowances.
· If you're going to be later than you
expected­deal with it. Take a deep
breath and accept the delay.
· Give other drivers the benefit of the
doubt. Try to imagine why they are
driving that way. Whatever their reason,
it has nothing to do with you.
· Slow down and keep your following
distance reasonable.
· Don't drive slowly in the left lane of
traffic.
· Avoid gestures. Keep your hands on
the wheel. Avoid making any gestures
that might anger another driver, even
seemingly harmless expressions of
irritation like shaking your head.
· Be a cautious and courteous driver. If
another driver seems eager to get in
front of you, say, "Be my guest." This
response will soon become a habit
and you won't be as offended by other
drivers' actions.
2.10.3 What you should
do when confronted by
an aggressive driver
· First, make every attempt to get out of
their way.
· Put your pride in the back seat. Do
not challenge them by speeding up or
attempting to hold-your-own in your
travel lane.
· Avoid eye contact.
· Ignore gestures and refuse to react to
them.
· Report aggressive drivers to the
appropriate authorities by providing
a vehicle description, license number,
location and, if possible, direction of
travel.
· If you have a cell phone, and can do it
safely, call the police.
· If an aggressive driver is involved in
a crash farther down the road, stop a
safe distance from the crash scene, wait
for the police to arrive, and report the
driving behavior that you witnessed.
Test your knowledge
1. What are some tips to follow so you won't
become a distracted driver?
2. How do you use in-vehicle
communications equipment cautiously?
3. How do you recognize a distracted driver?
4. What is the difference between aggressive
driving and road rage?
5. What should you do when confronted
with an aggressive driver?
6. What are some things you can do to
reduce your stress before and while you
drive?
These questions may be on the test. If you
can't answer them all, re-read subsections
2.9 and 2.10.
COVER 70 CONTENTS
2.11 Night driving and
driver fatigue
2.11.1 It's more dangerous
You are at greater risk when you drive at
night. Drivers can't see hazards as soon
as in daylight, so they have less time to
respond. Drivers caught by surprise are less
able to avoid a crash.
The problems of night driving involve the
driver, the roadway and the vehicle.
2.11.2 Driver factors
Vision
Good vision is critical for safe driving.
Your control of the brake, accelerator, and
steering wheel is based on what you see. If
you cannot see clearly, you will have trouble
identifying traffic and roadway conditions,
spotting potential trouble or responding to
problems in a timely manner.
Because seeing well is so critical to safe
driving, you should have your eyes checked
regularly by an eye specialist. You may never
know you have poor vision unless your eyes
are tested. If you need to wear glasses or
contact lenses for driving, remember to:
· Always wear them when driving, even
if driving short distances. If your
driver license says corrective lenses are
required, it is illegal to move a vehicle
without using corrective lenses.
· Keep an extra set of corrective lenses in
your vehicle. If your normal corrective
lenses are broken or lost, you can use the
spare lenses to drive safely.
· Avoid using dark or tinted corrective
lenses at night, even if you think they
help with glare. Tinted lenses cut down
the light that you need to see clearly
under night driving conditions.
Glare
Drivers can be blinded for a short time by
bright light. It takes time to recover from
this blindness. Older drivers are especially
bothered by glare. Most people have been
temporarily blinded by camera flash units or
by the high beams of an oncoming vehicle.
It can take several seconds to recover from
glare. Even two seconds of glare blindness
can be dangerous. A vehicle going 55 mph
will travel more than half the distance of a
football field during that time. Don't look
directly at bright lights when driving. Look
at the right side of the road. Watch the right
lane or edge marking when someone coming
toward you has very bright lights.
Fatigue and lack of alertness
Fatigue is physical or mental tiredness that
can be caused by physical or mental strain,
repetitive tasks, illness or lack of sleep. Just
like alcohol and drugs, it impairs your vision
and judgment.
Fatigue causes errors related to speed and
distance, increases your risk of being in a
crash, causes you to not see and react to
hazards as quickly; and affects your ability
to make critical decisions. When you are
fatigued, you could fall asleep behind the
wheel and crash, injuring or killing yourself
or others.
Fatigued or drowsy driving is one of the
leading causes of traffic collisions. NHTSA
estimates that 100,000 police-reported
crashes a year are the result of drowsy
driving. According to the National Sleep
Foundation's Sleep in America poll, 60% of
Americans have driven while feeling sleepy
and more than one third (36 percent or 103
million people) admit to having actually
fallen asleep at the wheel. Drivers may
COVER 71 CONTENTS
experience short bursts of sleep lasting
only a few seconds or fall asleep for longer
periods of time. Either way, the chance of a
collision increases dramatically.
At risk groups
The risk of having a crash due to drowsy
driving is not uniformly distributed across
the population. Crashes tend to occur at
times when sleepiness is most pronounced,
for example, during the night and in the mid-
afternoon. Most people are less alert at night,
especially after midnight. This is particularly
true if you have been driving for a long time.
Thus individuals who drive at night are much
more likely to have fall-asleep crashes.
Research has identified young males, shift
workers, commercial drivers, especially long-
haul drivers and people with untreated sleep
disorders or with short-term or chronic sleep
deprivation as being at increased risk for
having a fall-asleep crash. At least 15% of all
heavy truck crashes involve fatigue.
A congressionally-mandated study of 80
long-haul truck drivers in the United States
and Canada found that drivers averaged
less than 5 hours of sleep per day (Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 1996).
It is no surprise then that the National
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)
reported that drowsy driving was probably
the cause of more than half of crashes leading
to a truck driver's death. (NTSB, 1990) For
each truck driver fatality, another three to
four people are killed (NHTSA, 1994).
Warning sign of fatigue
According to the National Sleep
Foundation's Sleep in America poll, 60%
of Americans have driven while feeling
sleepy and 36% admit to actually having
fallen asleep at the wheel in the past year.
However, many people cannot tell if or when
they are about to fall asleep. Here are some
signs that should tell you to stop and rest:
· Difficulty focusing, frequent blinking or
heavy eyelids
· Yawning repeatedly or rubbing eyes
· Daydreaming, wandering and
disconnected thoughts
· Trouble remembering the last few miles
driven; missing exits or traffic signs
· Trouble keeping head up
· Drifting from your lane, following too
closely or hitting a shoulder rumble strip
· Feeling restless and irritable
When you are tired trying to "push on" is far
more dangerous than most drivers think.
It is a major cause of fatal crashes. If you
notice any signs of fatigue, stop driving and
go to sleep for the night or take a 15­20
minute nap.
Are you at risk?
Before you drive, consider whether you are:
· Sleep-deprived or fatigued (6 hours of
sleep or less triples your risk)
· Suffering from sleep loss (insomnia),
poor quality sleep, or a sleep debt
· Driving long distances without proper
rest breaks
· Driving through the night, mid-afternoon
or when you would normally be asleep.
Many heavy motor vehicle crashes occur
between midnight and 6 a.m.
· Taking sedating medications
(antidepressants, cold tablets,
antihistamines)
· Working more than 60 hours a week
(increases your risk by 40%)
COVER 72 CONTENTS
· Working more than one job, and your
main job involves shift work
· Driving alone or on a long, rural, dark or
boring road
· Flying, changing time zone
Preventing drowsiness before a trip
· Get adequate sleep­adults need 8 to 9
hours to maintain alertness
· Prepare route carefully to identify total
distance, stopping points and other
logistic considerations
· Schedule trips for the hours you are
normally awake, not the middle of the
night
· Drive with a passenger
· Avoid medications that cause drowsiness
· Consult your physician if you suffer
from daytime sleepiness, have difficulty
sleeping at night or take frequent naps
· Incorporate exercise into your daily life
to give you more energy
Maintaining alertness while driving
· Protect yourself from glare and eyestrain
with sunglasses
· Keep cool by opening the window or
using the air conditioner
· Avoid heavy foods
· Be aware of down time during the day
· Have another person ride with you, and
take turns driving
· Take periodic breaks­about every 100
miles or 2 hours during long trips
· Stop driving and get some rest or take
a nap
· Caffeine consumption can increase
awareness for a few hours, but do not
drink too much. It will eventually
wear off. Do not rely on caffeine to
prevent fatigue
· Avoid drugs. While they may keep you
awake for a while, they won't make
you alert.
If you are drowsy, the only safe cure is to get
off the road and get some sleep. If you don't,
you risk your life and the lives of others.
2.11.3 Roadway factors
Poor lighting
In the daytime there is usually enough light
to see well. This is not true at night. Some
areas may have bright street lights, but
many areas will have poor lighting. On most
roads you will probably need to depend
entirely on your headlights.
Less light means you will not be able to see
hazards as well as in daytime. Road users
who do not have lights are hard to see.
There are many crashes at night involving
pedestrians, joggers, bicyclists and animals.
Even when there are lights, the road
scene can be confusing. Traffic signals
and hazards can be hard to see against a
background of signs, shop windows and
other lights.
Drive slower when lighting is poor or
confusing. Drive slowly enough to be
sure you can stop in the distance you can
see ahead.
Drunk drivers
Drunk drivers and drivers under the
influence of drugs are a hazard to themselves
and to you. Be especially alert around the
closing times for bars and taverns. Watch for
drivers who have trouble staying in their lane
or maintaining speed, stop without reason or
show other signs of being under the influence
of alcohol or drugs.
COVER 73 CONTENTS
2.11.4 Vehicle factors
Headlights
At night your headlights will usually be the
main source of light for you to see and for
others to see you. You can't see nearly as
much with your headlights as you can see
in the daytime. With low beams you can see
ahead about 250 feet and with high beams
about 350­500 feet. You must adjust your
speed to keep your stopping distance within
your sight distance. This means going slow
enough to be able to stop within the range of
your headlights. Otherwise, by the time you
see a hazard, you will not have time to stop.
Night driving can be more dangerous if you
have problems with your headlights. Dirty
headlights may give only half the light they
should. This cuts down your ability to see
and makes it harder for others to see you.
Make sure your lights are clean and working.
Headlights can be out of adjustment. If they
don't point in the right direction, they won't
give you a good view and they can blind other
drivers. Have a qualified person make sure
they are adjusted properly.
Other lights
In order for you to be seen easily, the
following must be clean and working
properly:
· Reflectors.
· Marker lights.
· Clearance lights.
· Taillights.
· Identification lights.
Turn signals and brake lights
At night your turn signals and brake lights
are even more important for telling other
drivers what you intend to do. Make sure
you have clean, working turn signals and
stop lights.
Windshield and mirrors
It is more important at night than in the
daytime to have a clean windshield and
clean mirrors. Bright lights at night can
cause dirt on your windshield or mirrors
to create a glare of its own, blocking your
view. Most people have experienced driving
toward the sun just as it has risen or is
about to set and found that they can barely
see through a windshield that seemed to
look okay in the middle of the day. Clean
your windshield on the inside and outside
for safe driving at night.
2.11.5 Night driving procedures
Vehicle procedures
Make sure you are rested and alert. If
you are drowsy, sleep before you drive!
Even a nap can save your life or the lives
of others. If you wear eyeglasses, make
sure they are clean and unscratched. Don't
wear sunglasses at night. Do a complete
inspection of your vehicle. Pay attention
to checking all lights and reflectors and
cleaning those you can reach.
Avoid blinding others
Glare from your headlights can cause
problems for drivers coming towards you.
It can also bother drivers going in the
same direction you are, when your lights
shine in their rearview mirror. Dim your
lights before they cause glare for other
drivers. Dim your lights within 500 feet of
an oncoming vehicle and when following
another vehicle within 500 feet.
COVER 74 CONTENTS
Avoid glare from oncoming vehicles
Do not look directly at lights of oncoming
vehicles. Look slightly to the right at a right
lane or edge marking, if available. If other
drivers don't put their low beams on, don't
try to "get back at them" by putting your
own high beams on. This increases glare for
oncoming drivers and increases the chance
of a crash.
Use high beams when you can
Some drivers make the mistake of always
using low beams. This seriously cuts down
on their ability to see ahead. Use high
beams when it is safe and legal to do so. Use
them when you are not within 500 feet of an
approaching vehicle.
Don't let the inside of your cab get too
bright
This makes it harder to see outside. Keep
the interior light off and adjust your
instrument lights as low as you can and still
be able to read the gauges.
If you get sleepy, stop driving at the
nearest safe place
People often don't realize how close they are
to falling asleep even when their eyelids are
falling shut. If you can safely do so, look at
yourself in a mirror. If you look sleepy or
you just feel sleepy, stop driving! You are
in a very dangerous condition. The only safe
cure is to sleep.
2.12 Driving in fog
Fog can occur at any time. Fog on highways
can be extremely dangerous. Fog is often
unexpected, and visibility can deteriorate
rapidly. You should watch for foggy
conditions and be ready to reduce your
speed. Do not assume that the fog will thin
out after you enter it.
The best advice for driving in fog is
don't. Pull off the road into a rest area or
truck stop until visibility is better. If you
must drive, be sure to consider the following:
· Obey all fog-related warning signs.
· Slow before you enter fog.
· Use low-beam headlights and fog lights
for best visibility even in daytime, and
be alert for other drivers who may have
forgotten to turn on their lights.
· Turn on your 4-way flashers. This will
give vehicles approaching you from
behind a quicker opportunity to notice
your vehicle.
· Watch for vehicles on the side of the
roadway. Seeing taillights or headlights in
front of you may not be a true indication
of where the road is ahead of you. The
vehicle may not be on the road at all.
· Use roadside highway reflectors as guides
to determine how the road may curve
ahead of you.
· Listen for traffic you cannot see.
· Avoid passing other vehicles.
· Don't stop along the side of the road,
unless absolutely necessary.
2.13 Driving in winter
2.13.1 Vehicle checks
Make sure your vehicle is ready before
driving in winter weather. You should make
a regular vehicle inspection, paying extra
attention to the following items:
· Coolant level and antifreeze amount.
Make sure the cooling system is full and
there is enough anti-freeze in the system
to protect against freezing. This can be
checked with a special coolant tester.
COVER 75 CONTENTS
· Defrosting and heating equipment. Make
sure the defrosters work. They are needed
for safe driving. Make sure the heater
is working and that you know how to
operate it. If you use other heaters and
expect to need them (e.g., mirror heaters,
battery box heaters, fuel tank heaters),
check their operation.
· Wipers and washers. Make sure the
windshield wiper blades are in good
condition. Make sure the wiper blades
press against the window hard enough
to wipe the windshield clean. Otherwise
they may not sweep off snow properly.
Make sure the windshield washer works
and there is washing fluid in the washer
reservoir.
· Use windshield washer antifreeze to
prevent freezing of the washer fluid. If
you can't see well enough while driving
(for example, if your wipers fail), stop
safely and fix the problem.
· Tires. Make sure you have enough tread
on your tires. The drive tires must
provide traction to push the rig over
wet pavement and through snow. The
steering tires must have traction to steer
the vehicle. Enough tread is especially
important in winter conditions. You must
have at least 4/32-inch tread depth in
every major groove on front tires and at
least 2/32-inch on other tires. More would
be better. Use a gauge to determine if you
have enough tread for safe driving.
· Tire chains. You may find yourself in
conditions where you can't drive without
chains, even to get to a place of safety.
Carry the right number of chains and
extra cross links. Make sure they will
fit your drive tires. Check the chains for
broken hooks, worn or broken cross links
and bent or broken side chains. Learn
how to put the chains on before you need
to do it in snow and ice.
· Lights and reflectors. Make sure the
lights and reflectors are clean. Lights and
reflectors are especially important during
bad weather. Check from time to time
during bad weather to make sure they are
clean and working properly.
· Windows and mirrors. Remove any
ice, snow, etc., from the windshield,
windows and mirrors before starting. Use
a windshield scraper, snow brush and
windshield defroster as necessary.
· Hand holds, steps and deck plates.
Remove all ice and snow from hand
holds, steps and deck plates (cat walk)
which you must use to enter the cab or to
move about the vehicle. This will reduce
the danger of slipping.
· Radiator shutters and winterfront.
Remove ice from the radiator shutters.
Make sure the winterfront is not closed
too tightly. If the shutters freeze shut or
the winterfront is closed too much, the
engine may overheat and stop.
· Exhaust system. Exhaust system leaks
are especially dangerous when cab
ventilation may be poor (windows rolled
up, etc.) Loose connections could permit
poisonous carbon monoxide to leak into
your vehicle. Carbon monoxide gas will
cause you to be sleepy. In large enough
amounts it can kill you. Check the
exhaust system for loose parts and for
sounds and signs of leaks.
COVER 76 CONTENTS
2.13.2 Driving
Slippery surfaces
Drive slowly and smoothly on slippery roads.
If it is very slippery, you shouldn't drive at all.
Stop at the first safe place.
The following are some safety guidelines:
· Start gently and slowly. When first
starting, get the feel of the road.
Don't hurry.
· Check for ice. Check for ice on the road,
especially bridges and overpasses. A lack
of spray from other vehicles indicates
ice has formed on the road. Check your
mirrors and wiper blades for ice. If they
have ice, the road likely will be icy as well.
· Adjust turning and braking to conditions.
Make turns as gently as possible. Don't
brake any harder than necessary and
don't use the engine brake or speed
retarder. (They can cause the driving
wheels to skid on slippery surfaces.).
· Adjust speed to conditions. Don't pass
slower vehicles unless necessary. Go
slowly and watch far enough ahead to
keep a steady speed. Avoid having to slow
down and speed up. Take curves at slower
speeds and don't brake while in curves.
Be aware that as the temperature rises
to the point where ice begins to melt, the
road becomes even more slippery. Slow
down more.
· Adjust space to conditions. Don't drive
alongside other vehicles. Keep a longer
following distance. When you see a traffic
jam ahead, slow down or stop to wait for
it to clear. Try hard to anticipate stops
early and slow down gradually. Watch
for snowplows, as well as salt and sand
trucks, and give them plenty of room.
· Wet brakes. When driving in heavy rain
or deep standing water, your brakes will
get wet. Water in the brakes can cause
them to be weak, to apply unevenly or
to grab. This can cause lack of braking
power, wheel lockups, pulling to one
side or the other and jackknifing if you
pull a trailer.
Avoid driving through deep puddles or
flowing water if possible. If you can't, you
should:
· Slow down.
· Place transmission in a low gear.
· Gently put on the brakes. This presses
linings against brake drums or discs and
keeps mud, silt, sand and water from
getting in.
· Increase engine RPM and cross the
water while keeping light pressure on
the brakes.
· When out of the water, maintain light
pressure on the brakes for a short
distance to heat them up and dry
them out.
· Make a test stop when safe to do so.
Check behind to make sure no one is
following, then apply the brakes to be
sure they work properly. If not, dry
them out further as described above.
(CAUTION: Do not apply too much
brake pressure and accelerator at the
same time or you can overheat brake
drums and linings.)
COVER 77 CONTENTS
2.14 Driving in very
hot weather
2.14.1 Vehicle checks
Do a normal vehicle inspection, but pay
special attention to the following items.
Tires
Check the tire mounting and air pressure.
Inspect the tires every 2 hours or every 100
miles when driving in very hot weather. Air
pressure increases with temperature. Do
not let air out or the pressure will be too low
when the tires cool off. If a tire is too hot
to touch, remain stopped until it cools off.
Otherwise the tire may blow out or catch fire.
Engine oil
The engine oil helps keep the engine
cool, as well as lubricating it. Make sure
there is enough engine oil. If you have
an oil temperature gauge, make sure the
temperature is within the proper range
while you are driving.
Engine coolant
Before starting out, make sure the
engine cooling system has enough water
and antifreeze according to the engine
manufacturer's directions. (Antifreeze helps
the engine under hot conditions as well as
cold conditions.). When driving, check the
water temperature or coolant temperature
gauge from time to time. Make sure that it
remains in the normal range. If the gauge
goes above the highest safe temperature,
there may be something wrong that could
lead to engine failure and possibly fire. Stop
driving as soon as safely possible and try to
find out what is wrong.
Some vehicles have sight glasses, see-through
coolant overflow containers or coolant
recovery containers. These permit you to
check the coolant level while the engine
is hot. If the container is not part of the
pressurized system, the cap can be safely
removed and coolant added even when the
engine is at operating temperature.
Never remove the radiator cap or
any part of the pressurized system
until the system has cooled. Steam
and boiling water can spray under pressure
and cause severe burns. If you can touch
the radiator cap with your bare hand, it is
probably cool enough to open.
If coolant has to be added to a system
without a recovery tank or overflow tank,
follow these steps:
· Shut the engine off.
· Wait until the engine has cooled.
· Protect your hands (use gloves or a thick
cloth).
· Turn the radiator cap slowly to the first
stop, which releases the pressure seal.
· Step back while the pressure is released
from the cooling system.
· When all the pressure has been released,
press down on the cap and turn it
further to remove it.
· Visually check the level of coolant and
add more coolant if necessary.
· Replace the cap and turn it all the way to
the closed position.
Engine belts
Learn how to check V-belt tightness on
your vehicle by pressing on the belts.
Loose belts will not turn the water pump
and/or fan properly. This will result in
overheating Check belts for cracking or
other signs of wear.
Hoses
Make sure coolant hoses are in good
condition. A broken hose while driving can
lead to engine failure and even fire.
COVER 78 CONTENTS
2.14.2 Driving
Watch for bleeding tar
Tar in the road pavement frequently rises to
the surface in very hot weather. Spots where
tar "bleeds" to the surface are very slippery.
Go slowly enough to prevent
overheating
High speeds create more heat for tires
and the engine. In desert conditions the
heat may build up to the point where it is
dangerous. The heat will increase chances of
tire failure or even fire and engine failure.
Test your knowledge
1. True or False? You should use low beams
whenever you can.
2. What should you do before you drive if
you are drowsy?
3. What effects can wet brakes cause? How
can you avoid these problems?
4. True or False? You should let air out of
hot tires so the pressure goes back to
normal.
5. True or False? You can safely remove the
radiator cap as long as the engine isn't
overheated.
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 2.11, 2.12, 2.13 and 2.14.
2.15 Railroad­highway
crossings
Railroad-highway grade crossings are
a special kind of intersection where the
roadway crosses train tracks. These
crossings are always dangerous. Every
such crossing must be approached with
the expectation that a train is coming. It is
extremely difficult to judge the distance of
the train from the crossing as well as the
speed of an approaching train.
2.15.1 Types of crossings
Passive crossings
This type of crossing does not have any type
of traffic control device. The decision to
stop or proceed rests entirely in your hands.
Passive crossings require you to recognize
the crossing, search for any train using the
tracks and decide if there is sufficient clear
space to cross safely. Passive crossings have
yellow circular advance warning signs,
pavement markings and crossbucks to assist
you in recognizing a crossing.
Active crossings
This type of crossing has a traffic control
device installed at the crossing to regulate
traffic at the crossing. These active
devices include flashing red lights, with or
without bells and flashing red lights with
bells and gates.
2.15.2 Warning signs
and devices
Advance warning signs
The round, black-on-yellow warning sign is
placed ahead of a public railroad-highway
crossing. The advance warning sign tells you
to slow down, look and listen for the train,
and be prepared to stop at the tracks if a
COVER 79 CONTENTS
train is coming. All passenger and hazmat
carrying vehicles are required to stop. See
Figure 2.17.
Figure 2.17 Round Yellow Warning Sign
R
R
Pavement markings
Pavement markings mean the same as the
advance warning sign. They consist of an
"X" with the letters "RR" and a no-passing
marking on two-lane roads. See Figure 2.18.
Figure 2.18 Pavement Markings
There is also a no passing zone sign on
two-lane roads. There may be a white stop
line painted on the pavement before the
railroad tracks. The front of the bus must
remain behind this line while stopped at
the crossing.
Crossbuck signs
This sign marks the grade crossing. It
requires you to yield the right of way to the
train. If there is no white stop line painted
on the pavement, vehicles that are required
to stop must stop no closer than 15 feet or
more than 50 feet from the nearest rail of
the nearest track. When the road crosses
over more than one set of tracks, a sign
below the crossbuck indicates the number of
tracks. See Figure 2.19.
Figure 2.19 Multiple Tracks
CRO
SSIN
G
RAIL
ROAD
TRACKS
3
YIELD
Flashing red light signals
At many highway-rail grade crossings, the
crossbuck sign has flashing red lights and
bells. When the lights begin to flash, stop!
A train is approaching. You are required to
yield the right of way to the train. If there is
more than one track, make sure all tracks
are clear before crossing. See Figure 2.20.
Gates
Many railroad-highway crossings have gates
with flashing red lights and bells. Stop when
the lights begin to flash and before the gate
COVER 80 CONTENTS
lowers across the road lane. Remain stopped
until the gates go up and the lights have
stopped flashing. Proceed when it is safe.
See Figure 2.20.
Figure 2.20 Gates/Lights
CRO
SSIN
G
RAIL
ROAD
TRACKS
3
2.15.3 Driving procedures
Never Race a Train to a Crossing
Never attempt to race a train to a crossing.
It is extremely difficult to judge the speed of
an approaching train.
Reduce Speed
Speed must be reduced in accordance with
your ability to see approaching trains in any
direction and speed must be held to a point
which will permit you to stop short of the
tracks in case a stop is necessary.
Don't Expect to Hear a Train
Trains may not or are prohibited from
sounding horns when approaching some
crossings. Public crossings where trains
do not sound horns should be identified by
signs. Noise inside your vehicle may also
prevent you from hearing the train horn until
the train is dangerously close to the crossing.
Don't Rely on Signals
You should not rely solely upon the presence
of warning signals, gates or flagmen to
warn of the approach of trains. Be especially
alert at crossings that do not have gates or
flashing red light signals.
Double tracks require a double check
Remember that a train on one track may
hide a train on the other track. Look both
ways before crossing. After one train has
cleared a crossing, be sure no other trains
are near before starting across the tracks.
Yard areas and grade crossings in cities
and towns are just as dangerous as rural
grade crossings. Approach them with as
much caution.
2.15.4 Stopping safely at
railroad-highway crossings
A full-stop is required at grade crossings
whenever:
· The nature of the cargo makes a stop
mandatory under state or federal
regulations.
· Such a stop is otherwise required by law.
When stopping be sure to:
· Check for traffic behind you while
stopping gradually. Use a pullout lane,
if available.
· Turn on your four-way emergency
flashers.
2.15.5 Crossing the tracks
Railroad crossings with steep approaches can
cause your unit to hang up on the tracks.
· Never permit traffic conditions to trap
you in a position where you have to stop
on the tracks. Be sure you can get all the
COVER 81 CONTENTS
way across the tracks before you start
across. It takes a typical tractor-trailer
unit at least 14 seconds to clear a single
track and more than 15 seconds to clear
a double track.
· Do not shift gears while crossing railroad
tracks.
2.15.6 Special situations
Be aware! These trailers can get stuck on
raised crossings:
· Low slung units (lowboy, car carrier,
moving van, possum-belly livestock
trailer).
· Single-axle tractor pulling a long trailer
with its landing gear set to accommodate
a tandem-axle tractor.
If for any reason you get stuck on the tracks,
get out of the vehicle and away from the
tracks. Check signposts or signal housing
at the crossing for emergency notification
information. Call 911 or other emergency
number. Give the location of the crossing
using all identifiable landmarks, especially
the DOT number, if posted.
2.16 Mountain driving
In mountain driving, gravity plays a major
role. On any upgrade, gravity slows you
down. The steeper the grade, the longer
the grade, and/or the heavier the load­the
more you will need to use lower gears to
climb hills or mountains. In coming down
long, steep downgrades, gravity causes
the speed of your vehicle to increase. You
must select an appropriate safe speed,
then use a low gear and use proper braking
techniques. You should plan ahead and
obtain information about any long steep
grades along your planned route of travel.
If possible, talk to other drivers who are
familiar with the grades to find out what
speeds are safe.
You must go slowly enough so your brakes
can hold you back without getting too hot. If
the brakes become too hot, they may start to
"fade." This means you have to apply them
harder and harder to get the same stopping
power. If you continue to use the brakes
hard, they can keep fading until you cannot
slow down or stop at all.
2.16.1 Select a safe speed
Your most important consideration is to
select a speed that is not too fast for the:
· Total weight of the vehicle and cargo.
· Length of the grade.
· Steepness of the grade.
· Road conditions.
· Weather.
If a speed limit is posted or there is a sign
indicating "Maximum Safe Speed," never
exceed the speed shown. Look for and heed
warning signs indicating the length and
steepness of the grade.
You must use the braking effect of the
engine as the principal way of controlling
your speed. The braking effect of the engine
is greatest when it is near the governed
RPMs and the transmission is in the lower
gears. Save your brakes so you will be able
to slow or stop as required by road and
traffic conditions.
2.16.2 Select the right gear
before starting down the grade
Shift the transmission to a low gear based
on the steepness of the grade, weather, road
conditions and your load before starting
down the grade. Do not try to downshift
after your speed has already built up. You
COVER 82 CONTENTS
will not be able to shift into a lower gear.
You may not even be able to get back into
any gear and all engine braking effect will
be lost. Forcing an automatic transmission
into a lower gear at high speed could
damage the transmission and also lead to
loss of all engine braking effect.
With older trucks, a rule for choosing
gears is to use the same gear going down a
hill that you would need to climb the hill.
However, new trucks have low friction parts
and streamlined shapes for fuel economy.
They may also have more powerful engines.
This means they can go up hills in higher
gears and have less friction and air drag to
hold them back going down hills. For that
reason, drivers of modern trucks may have
to use lower gears going down a hill than
would be required to go up the hill. You
should know what is right for your vehicle.
2.16.3 Brake fading or failure
Brakes are designed so brake shoes or pads
rub against the brake drum or disks to slow
the vehicle. Braking creates heat, but brakes
are designed to take a lot of heat. However,
brakes can fade or fail from excessive heat
caused by using them too much and not
relying on the engine braking effect.
Brake fade is also affected by adjustment.
To safely control a vehicle, every brake
must do its share of the work. Brakes out
of adjustment will stop doing their share
before those that are in adjustment. The
other brakes can then overheat and fade and
there will not be enough braking available
to control the vehicle. Brakes can get out of
adjustment quickly, especially when they
are used a lot; also, brake linings wear
faster when they are hot. Therefore, brake
adjustment must be checked frequently.
2.16.4 Proper braking technique
Remember: The use of brakes on a long
and/or steep downgrade is only a supplement
to the braking effect of the engine. Once
the vehicle is in the proper low gear, the
following is a proper braking technique:
1. Apply the brakes just hard enough to feel
a definite slowdown.
2. When your speed has been reduced to
approximately 5 mph below your "safe"
speed, release the brakes. (This brake
application should last for about three
seconds.)
3. When your speed has increased to your
"safe" speed, repeat steps 1 and 2.
For example, if your "safe" speed is
40 mph, you would not apply the brakes
until your speed reaches 40 mph. You now
apply the brakes hard enough to gradually
reduce your speed to 35 mph and then
release the brakes. Repeat this as often as
necessary until you have reached the end
of the downgrade.
Escape ramps
Escape ramps have been built on many
steep mountain downgrades. They are made
to stop runaway vehicles safely without
injuring drivers and passengers. Escape
ramps use a long bed of loose soft material
to slow a runaway vehicle, sometimes in
combination with an upgrade.
Know escape ramp locations on your route.
Signs show drivers where ramps are located.
Escape ramps save lives, equipment and
cargo. Use them if you lose your brakes.
COVER 83 CONTENTS
Test your knowledge
1. What factors determine your selection of
a "safe" speed when going down a long,
steep downgrade?
2. Why should you be in the proper gear
before starting down a hill?
3. Describe the proper braking technique
when going down a long, steep
downgrade.
4. What type of vehicles can get stuck on a
railroad-highway crossing?
5. How long does it take for a typical
tractor-trailer unit to clear a double
track?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 2.15 and 2.16.
2.17 Driving emergencies
Traffic emergencies occur when two vehicles
are about to collide. Vehicle emergencies
occur when tires, brakes or other critical
parts fail. Following the safety practices in
this manual can help prevent emergencies.
But if an emergency does happen, your
chances of avoiding a crash depend upon
how well you take action. Actions you can
take are discussed below.
2.17.1 Steering to avoid a crash
Stopping is not always the safest thing to
do in an emergency When you do not have
enough room to stop, you may need to steer
away from what's ahead. Remember, you
can almost always turn to miss an obstacle
more quickly than you can stop. However,
top-heavy vehicles and tractors with
multiple trailers can flip over.
Keep both hands on the steering
wheel
In order to turn quickly, you must have a
firm grip on the steering wheel with both
hands. The best way to have both hands
on the wheel, if there is an emergency, is to
keep them there all the time.
How to turn quickly and safely
A quick turn can be made safely, if it's done
the right way. Here are some points that safe
drivers use:
· Do not apply the brakes while you
are turning. It's very easy to lock your
wheels while turning. If that happens,
you can skid out of control.
· Do not turn any more than needed to
clear whatever is in your way. The more
sharply you turn, the greater the chances
of a skid or rollover.
· Be prepared to "countersteer," that is,
to turn the wheel back in the other
direction, once you've passed whatever
was in your path. Unless you are
prepared to countersteer, you won't
be able to do it quickly enough. You
should think of emergency steering and
countersteering as two parts of one
driving action.
Where to steer
If an oncoming driver has drifted into your
lane, a move to your right is best. If that
driver realizes what has happened, the
natural response will be to return to his or
her own lane.
If something is blocking your path, the
best direction to steer will depend on the
situation.
COVER 84 CONTENTS
· If you have been using your mirrors,
you'll know which lane is empty and can
be safely used.
· If the shoulder is clear, going right may
be best. No one is likely to be driving
on the shoulder but someone may be
passing you on the left. You will know if
you have been using your mirrors.
· If you are blocked on both sides, a move
to the right may be best. At least you
won't force anyone into an opposing
traffic lane, possibly resulting in a head-
on collision.
Leaving the road
In some emergencies, you may have to drive
off the road. It may be less risky than facing
a collision with another vehicle.
Most shoulders are strong enough to support
the weight of a large vehicle and, therefore,
offer an available escape route. Here are
some guidelines, if you do leave the road:
· Avoid braking. If possible, avoid using
the brakes until your speed has dropped
to about 20 mph. Then brake very gently
to avoid skidding on a loose surface.
· Keep one set of wheels on the pavement
if possible. This helps to maintain
control.
· Stay on the shoulder. If the shoulder is
clear, stay on it until your vehicle has
come to a stop. Signal and check your
mirrors before pulling back onto the road.
Returning to the road
If you are forced to return to the road before
you can stop, use the following procedure:
· Hold the wheel tightly. Turn sharply
enough to get right back on the road
safely. Don't try to edge gradually back on
the road. If you do, your tires might grab
unexpectedly and you could lose control.
· When both front tires are on the paved
surface, countersteer immediately.
The two turns should be made as a single
"steer-countersteer" movement.
2.17.2 How to stop
quickly and safely
If somebody suddenly pulls out in front
of you, your natural response is to hit the
brakes. This is a good response if there's
enough distance to stop and you use the
brakes correctly.
You should brake in a way that will keep
your vehicle in a straight line and allow you
to turn if it becomes necessary. You can use
the "controlled braking" method or the "stab
braking" method.
Controlled braking
With this method, you apply the brakes
as hard as you can without locking the
wheels. Keep steering wheel movements
very small while doing this. If you need to
make a larger steering adjustment or if the
wheels lock, release the brakes. Re-apply the
brakes as soon as you can.
Stab braking
· Apply your brakes all the way.
· Release the brakes when your wheels
lock up.
· As soon as the wheels start rolling, apply
the brakes fully again. (It can take up to
one second for the wheels to start rolling
after you release the brakes. If you re-
apply the brakes before the wheels start
rolling, the vehicle won't straighten out.).
COVER 85 CONTENTS
Don't jam on the brakes
Emergency braking does not mean pushing
down on the brake pedal as hard as you can.
That will only keep the wheels locked up
and cause a skid. If the wheels are skidding,
you cannot control the vehicle.
NOTE: If you drive a vehicle with anti-
lock brakes, you should read and follow
the directions found in the Vehicle Owners
Manual for stopping quickly.
2.17.3 Brake failure
Brakes kept in good condition rarely fail.
Most hydraulic brake failures occur for one
of two reasons:
· Loss of hydraulic pressure.
· Brake fade on long downgrades.
Air brakes are discussed in Section 5.
Loss of hydraulic pressure
When the system won't build up pressure,
the brake pedal will feel spongy or go to the
floor. Here are some things you can do:
· Downshift. Putting the vehicle into a
lower gear will help to slow the vehicle.
· Pump the brakes. Sometimes pumping
the brake pedal will generate enough
hydraulic pressure to stop the vehicle.
· Use the parking brake. The parking or
emergency brake is separate from the
hydraulic brake system. It can be used
to slow the vehicle. Be sure to press the
release button or pull the release lever
at the same time you use the emergency
brake so you can adjust the brake
pressure and keep the wheels from
locking up.
· Find an escape route. While slowing
the vehicle, look for an escape route­an
open field, side street or escape ramp.
Turning uphill is a good way to slow and
stop the vehicle. Make sure the vehicle
does not start rolling backward after you
stop. Put it in low gear, apply the parking
brake, and, if necessary, roll back into
some obstacle that will stop the vehicle.
Brake failure on downgrades
Going slowly enough, selecting the proper
gear and braking properly will almost
always prevent brake failure on long
downgrades. Once the brakes have failed,
you will need to look outside your vehicle for
something to stop it.
Your best hope is an escape ramp. If there
is one, there will be signs telling you about
it. Use it. Escape ramps are usually located
a few miles from the top of the downgrade.
Every year, hundreds of drivers avoid injury
to themselves or damage to their vehicles
by using escape ramps. Some escape ramps
use soft gravel that resists the motion of the
vehicle and brings it to a stop. Others turn
uphill, using the hill to stop the vehicle and
soft gravel to hold it in place
Any driver who loses brakes going downhill
should use an escape ramp if it's available.
If you don't use it, your chances of having a
serious crash may be much greater.
If no escape ramp is available, take the least
hazardous escape route you can­such as
an open field or a side road that flattens out
or turns uphill. Make the move as soon as
you know your brakes are not working. The
longer you wait, the faster the vehicle will go
and the harder it will be to stop
COVER 86 CONTENTS
2.17.4 Tire failure
Recognize tire failure
Quickly knowing you have a tire failure will
let you have more time to react. Having just
a few seconds to remember what it is you're
supposed to do can help you. The major
signs of tire failure are:
· Sound. The loud "bang" of a blowout is
an easily recognized sign. Because it can
take a few seconds for your vehicle to
react, you might think it was some other
vehicle. But any time you hear a tire blow,
you'd be safest to assume it was yours.
· Vibration. If the vehicle thumps or
vibrates heavily, it may be a sign that
one of the tires has gone flat. With a rear
tire, that may be the only sign you get.
· Feel. If the steering feels "heavy," it is
probably a sign that one of the front tires
has failed. Sometimes, failure of a rear
tire will cause the vehicle to slide back
and forth or "fishtail." However, dual
rear tires usually prevent this.
Respond to tire failure
When a tire fails, your vehicle is in danger.
You must immediately:
· Hold the steering wheel firmly. If a
front tire fails, it can twist the steering
wheel out of your hands. The only way
to prevent this is to keep a firm grip on
the steering wheel with both hands at
all times.
· Stay off the brake. It's natural to want to
brake in an emergency. However, braking
when a tire has failed could cause loss of
control. Unless you're about to run into
something, stay off the brake until the
vehicle has slowed down. Then brake very
gently, pull off the road and stop.
· Check the tires. After you've come to
a stop, get out and check all the tires.
Do this even if the vehicle seems to be
handling all right. If one of your dual
tires goes, the only way you may know it
is by getting out and looking at it.
2.18 Antilock braking
systems (ABS)
ABS is a computerized system that keeps
your wheels from locking up during hard
brake applications.
ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It
does not decrease or increase your normal
braking capability. ABS only activates when
wheels are about to lock up.
ABS does not necessarily shorten your
stopping distance but it does help you
keep the vehicle under control during
hard braking.
2.18.1 How antilock
braking systems work
Sensors detect potential wheel lock up.
An electronic control unit (ECU) will then
decrease brake pressure to avoid wheel
lockup.
Brake pressure is adjusted to provide the
maximum braking without danger of lockup.
ABS works far faster than the driver can
respond to potential wheel lockup. At all
other times the brake system will operate
normally.
COVER 87 CONTENTS
2.18.2 Vehicles required to
have antilock braking systems
The Department of Transportation requires
that ABS be on:
· Truck tractors with air brakes built on or
after March 1, 1997.
· Other air brake vehicles, (trucks, buses,
trailers, and converter dollies) built on or
after March 1, 1998.
· Hydraulically braked trucks and buses
with a gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or more built on or after
March 1, 1999.
Many commercial vehicles built before
these dates have been voluntarily equipped
with ABS.
2.18.3 How to know if your
vehicle is equipped with ABS
Tractors, trucks and buses will have yellow
ABS malfunction lamps on the instrument
panel.
Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction
lamps on the left side, either on the front or
rear corner.
Dollies manufactured on or after March
1, 1998 are required to have a lamp on the
left side.
As a system check on newer vehicles, the
malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for
a bulb check and then goes out quickly. On
older systems, the lamp could stay on until
you are driving over 5 mph.
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check or
goes on once you are under way, you may
have lost ABS control.
In the case of towed units manufactured
before it was required by the Department
of Transportation, it may be difficult to
tell if the unit is equipped with ABS. Look
under the vehicle for the ECU and wheel
speed sensor wires coming from the back
of the brakes.
2.18.4 How ABS helps you
When you brake hard on slippery surfaces
in a vehicle without ABS, your wheels may
lock up. When your steering wheels lock up,
you lose steering control. When your other
wheels lock up, you may skid, jackknife or
even spin the vehicle.
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up and
maintain control. You may or may not
be able to stop faster with ABS but you
should be able to steer around an obstacle
while braking and avoid skids caused by
over braking.
2.18.5 ABS on the tractor
only or only on the trailer
Having ABS on only the tractor, only the
trailer or even on only one axle still gives
you more control over the vehicle during
braking. Brake normally.
When only the tractor has ABS, you should
be able to maintain steering control and
there is less chance of jackknifing. But keep
your eye on the trailer and let up on the
brakes (if you can safely do so) if it begins to
swing out.
When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer
is less likely to swing out. But if you lose
steering control or start a tractor jackknife,
let up on the brakes (if you can safely do so)
until you regain control.
COVER 88 CONTENTS
2.18.6 Braking with ABS
When you drive a vehicle with ABS, you
should brake as you always have. In other
words:
· Use only the braking force necessary to
stop safely and stay in control.
· Brake the same way, regardless of
whether you have ABS on the bus,
tractor, the trailer, or both.
· As you slow down, monitor your tractor
and trailer and back off the brakes (if it
is safe to do so) to stay in control.
There is only one exception to this
procedure. If you drive a straight truck or
combination with working ABS on all axles,
in an emergency stop, you can fully apply
the brakes.
2.18.7 Braking if ABS
is not working
Without ABS you still have normal brake
functions. Drive and brake as you always
have.
Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction
lamps to tell you if something isn't working.
As a system check on newer vehicles, the
malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for
a bulb check and then goes out quickly. On
older systems, the lamp could stay on until
you are driving over 5 mph.
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check or
goes on once you are under way, you may
have lost ABS control on one or more wheels.
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you
still have regular brakes. Drive normally but
get the system serviced soon.
2.18.8 Safety reminders
· ABS won't allow you to drive faster,
follow more closely or drive less
carefully.
· ABS won't prevent power or turning
skids. ABS should prevent brake-induced
skids or jackknifes but not those caused
by spinning the drive wheels or going too
fast in a turn.
· ABS won't necessarily shorten stopping
distance. ABS will help maintain vehicle
control but not always shorten stopping
distance.
· ABS won't increase or decrease ultimate
stopping power. ABS is an "add-on" to
your normal brakes, not a replacement
for them.
· ABS won't change the way you normally
brake. Under normal brake conditions,
your vehicle will stop as it always
stopped. ABS only comes into play when
a wheel would normally have locked up
because of over braking.
· ABS won't compensate for bad brakes or
poor brake maintenance.
The best vehicle safety feature is still a
safe driver.
Drive so you never need to use your ABS.
If you need it, ABS could help to prevent a
serious crash.
2.19 Skid control
and recovery
A skid happens whenever the tires lose their
grip on the road. This is caused in one of
four ways:
· Over-braking. Braking too hard and
locking up the wheels. Skids can also
COVER 89 CONTENTS
occur when using the speed retarder
when the road is slippery.
· Over-steering. Turning the wheels more
sharply than the vehicle can turn.
· Over-accelerating. Supplying too much
power to the drive wheels, causing them
to spin.
· Driving too fast. Most serious skids
result from driving too fast for road
conditions. Drivers who adjust their
driving to conditions don't over-
accelerate and don't have to over-brake
or over-steer from too much speed.
2.19.1 Drive-wheel skids
By far the most common skid is one in
which the rear wheels lose traction through
excessive braking or acceleration. Skids
caused by acceleration usually happen on
ice or snow. They can be easily stopped by
taking your foot off the accelerator. (If it is
very slippery, push the clutch in. Otherwise,
the engine can keep the wheels from rolling
freely and regaining traction.)
Rear wheel braking skids occur when the
rear drive wheels lock. Because locked
wheels have less traction than rolling
wheels, the rear wheels usually slide
sideways in an attempt to catch up with
the front wheels. In a bus or straight truck,
the vehicle will slide sideways in a spin
out. With vehicles towing trailers, a drive-
wheel skid can let the trailer push the
towing vehicle sideways, causing a sudden
jackknife. See Figure 2-21.
Figure 2-21: Tractor Jackknife
Line of Travel
Direction of Slide
Rear Tractor Wheels
locked-up or spinning
2.19.2 Correcting a drive-
wheel braking skid
Do the following to correct a drive-wheel
braking skid:
· Stop braking. This will let the rear wheels
roll again and keep the rear wheels from
sliding any further. If on ice, push in the
clutch to let the wheels turn freely.
· Steer. When a vehicle begins to slide
sideways, quickly steer in the direction
you want the vehicle to go­down the
road. You must turn the wheel quickly.
· Countersteer. As a vehicle turns back on
course, it has a tendency to keep right
on turning. Unless you turn the steering
wheel quickly the other way, you may find
yourself sliding in the opposite direction.
COVER 90 CONTENTS
Learning to stay off the brake, turn the
steering wheel quickly, push in the clutch
and counter-steer in a skid takes a lot of
practice. The best place to get this practice is
on a large driving range or "skid pad."
2.19.3 Front-wheel skids
Most front-wheel skids are caused by
driving too fast for conditions. Other causes
are lack of tread on the front tires and cargo
loaded so not enough weight is on the front
axle. In a front-wheel skid, the front end
tends to go in a straight line regardless of
how much you turn the steering wheel. On a
very slippery surface, you may not be able to
steer around a curve or turn.
When a front-wheel skid occurs, the only
way to stop the skid is to let the vehicle slow
down. Stop turning and/or braking so hard.
Slow down as quickly as possible without
skidding.
Test your knowledge
1. True or False? Stopping is not always the
safest thing to do in an emergency.
2. What are some advantages of going right
instead of left around an obstacle?
3. What is an "escape ramp"?
4. True or False? If a tire blows out, you
should put the brakes on hard to stop
quickly.
5. How do you know if your vehicle has
antilock brakes?
6. What is the proper braking technique
when driving a vehicle with antilock
brakes?
7. How do antilock brakes help you?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 2.17, 2.18 and 2.19.
2.20 Crash procedures
When you're in a crash and not seriously
hurt, you need to act to prevent further
damage or injury. The basic steps to be
taken at any crash are to:
· Protect the area.
· Notify authorities.
· Care for the injured.
2.20.1 Protect the area
The first thing to do at a crash scene is to
keep another crash from happening at the
same spot. To protect the crash area:
· If your vehicle is involved in the crash,
try to get it to the side of the road. This
will help prevent another crash and
allow traffic to move.
· If you're stopping to help, park away from
the crash. The area immediately around
the crash will be needed for emergency
vehicles.
· Put on your flashers.
· Set out reflective triangles to warn other
traffic. Make sure they can be seen by
other drivers in time for them to avoid
the crash.
2.20.2 Notify authorities­CB
or phone (Dial 911)
If you have a cell phone or CB, call for
assistance before you get out of your vehicle.
If not, wait until after the crash scene has
been properly protected, then phone or
send someone to phone the police. Try to
determine where you are so you can give the
exact location.
2.20.3 Care for the injured
If a qualified person is at the crash and
helping the injured, stay out of the way
unless asked to assist. Otherwise, do the
COVER 91 CONTENTS
best you can to help any injured parties.
Here are some basic steps to follow in giving
assistance:
· Don't move a severely injured person
unless the danger of fire or passing
traffic makes it necessary.
· Stop heavy bleeding by applying direct
pressure to the wound. Keep the injured
person warm.
2.21 Fires
Truck fires can cause damage and injury.
Learn the causes of fires and how to prevent
them. Know what to do to extinguish fires.
2.21.1 Causes of fire
The following are some causes of vehicle
fires:
· After crashes. Spilled fuel, improper use
of flares.
· Tires. Under-inflated tires and duals that
touch.
· Electrical system. Short circuits due to
damaged insulation, loose connections.
· Fuel. Driver smoking, improper fueling,
loose fuel connections.
· Cargo. Flammable cargo, improperly
sealed or loaded, poor ventilation.
2.21.2 Fire prevention
Pay attention to the following:
· Vehicle inspection. Make a complete
inspection of the electrical, fuel and
exhaust systems, tires and cargo. Be
sure to check that the fire extinguisher is
charged.
· En route inspection. Check the tires,
wheels and truck body for signs of heat
whenever you stop during a trip.
· Follow safe procedures. Follow correct
safety procedures for fueling the vehicle,
(stay with the vehicle and watch the
nozzle while fueling to prevent spills),
using brakes, handling flares and other
activities that can cause a fire.
· Monitoring. Check the instruments and
gauges often for signs of overheating
and use the mirrors to look for signs of
smoke from tires on the vehicle.
· Use caution. Use normal caution in
handling anything flammable.
2.21.3 Fire fighting
Knowing how to fight fires is important.
Fires have been made worse by drivers who
didn't know what to do. Know how the fire
extinguisher works. Study the instructions
printed on the extinguisher before you need
it. Here are some procedures to follow in
case of fire:
Pull off the road
The first step is to get the vehicle off the
road and stop. In doing so:
· Park in an open area, away from
buildings, trees, brush, other vehicles or
anything that might catch fire.
· Don't pull into a service station!
· Notify emergency services of your
problem and your location.
Keep the fire from spreading
Before trying to put out the fire, make sure
that it doesn't spread any further.
· With an engine fire, turn off the engine
as soon as you can. Don't open the hood
if you can avoid it. Shoot extinguishers
through louvers, radiator or from the
underside of the vehicle.
COVER 92 CONTENTS
· For a cargo fire in a van or box trailer,
keep the doors shut, especially if your
cargo contains hazardous materials.
Opening the van doors will supply the
fire with oxygen and can cause it to burn
very fast.
Extinguish the fire
Here are some rules to follow in putting out
a fire:
· When using the extinguisher, stay as far
away from the fire as possible.
· Aim at the source or base of the fire, not
up in the flames.
Use the right fire extinguisher
· The B:C type fire extinguisher is
designed to work on electrical fires and
burning liquids.
· The A:B:C type is designed to work on
burning wood, paper and cloth as well.
· Water can be used on wood, paper or
cloth, but don't use water on an electrical
fire (you could get shocked) or a gasoline
fire (it will just spread the flames).
· A burning tire must be cooled. Lots of
water may be required.
· If you're not sure what to use, especially
on a hazardous materials fire, wait for
qualified firefighters.
· Position yourself upwind. Let the wind
carry the extinguisher to the fire.
· Continue until whatever was burning has
been cooled. Absence of smoke or flame
does not mean the fire cannot restart.
Figure 2-22. Class/Type of Fires
CLASS TYPE
A
Wood, Paper, Ordinary
Combustibles: Extinguish by
Cooling and Quenching Using
Water or Dry Chemicals
B
Gasoline, Oil, Grease, Other
Greasy Liquids: Extinguish
by Smothering, Cooling or
Heat Shielding using Carbon
Dioxide or Dry Chemicals
C
Electrical Equipment Fires:
Extinguish with Nonconducting
Agents such as Carbon
Dioxide or Dry Chemicals.
DO NOT USE WATER.
D
Fires in Combustible Metals:
Extinguish by Using Specialized
Extinguishing Powders
Figure 2-23. Class of Fire/Type of
Extinguisher
CLASS OF
FIRE
FIRE EXTINGUISHER
TYPE
B or C Regular Dry Chemical
A, B, C,
or D Multi Purpose Dry Chemical
D Purple K Dry Chemical
B or C KCL Dry Chemical
D Dry Powder Special Compound
B or C Carbon Dioxide (Dry)
B or C Halogenated Agent (Gas)
A Water
A Water With Anti-Freeze
A or B Water, Loaded Steam Style
B, on
some A Foam
COVER 93 CONTENTS
Test your knowledge
1. What are some things to do at a crash
scene to prevent another crash?
2. Name two causes of tire fires.
3. What kinds of fires is a B:C extinguisher
not good for?
4. When using your extinguisher, should
you get as close as possible to the fire?
5. Name some causes of vehicle fires.
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 2.20 and 2.21.
2.22 Alcohol, other
drugs and driving
2.22.1 Alcohol and driving
Drinking alcohol and then driving is a
very dangerous and serious problem.
People who drink alcohol are involved
in traffic accidents resulting in over
20,000 deaths every year. Alcohol impairs
muscle coordination, reaction time, depth
perception and night vision. It also affects
the parts of the brain that control judgment
and inhibition. For some people, one drink
is all it takes to show signs of impairment.
How alcohol works
Alcohol goes directly into the blood stream
and is carried to the brain. After passing
through the brain, a small percentage
is removed in urine, perspiration, and
by breathing, while the rest is carried to
the liver. The liver can only process one-
third an ounce of alcohol per hour, which
is considerably less than the alcohol in a
standard drink. This is a fixed rate, so only
time, not black coffee or a cold shower, will
sober you up. If you have drinks faster than
your body can get rid of them, you will have
more alcohol in your body, and your driving
will be more affected. The Blood Alcohol
Concentration (BAC) commonly measures
the amount of alcohol in your body.
All of the following drinks contain the
same amount of alcohol:
· A 12 ounce glass of 5% beer.
· A 5 ounce glass of 12% wine.
· A 1 ½ ounce shot of 80 proof liquor.
What determines blood alcohol
concentration
BAC is determined by the amount of alcohol
you drink (more alcohol means higher
BAC), how fast you drink (faster drinking
means higher BAC) and your weight (a small
person doesn't have to drink as much as a
larger person to reach the same BAC).
Alcohol and the brain
Alcohol affects more and more of the brain
as BAC builds up. The first part of the brain
affected controls judgment and self-control.
This can keep drinkers from knowing they
are getting drunk. Good judgment and self-
control are necessary for safe driving.
As BAC continues to build up, muscle
control, vision and coordination are affected
more and more. Effects on driving may
include:
· Straddling lanes.
· Quick, jerky starts.
· Not signaling, failure to use lights.
· Running stop signs and red lights.
· Improper passing.
These effects mean increased chances of a
crash and of losing your driver license. Crash
statistics show that the chance of a crash
is much greater for drivers who have been
drinking than for drivers who have not.
COVER 94 CONTENTS
How alcohol affects driving
All drivers are affected by drinking
alcohol. Alcohol affects judgment, vision,
coordination and reaction time. It causes
serious driving errors, such as:
· Increased reaction time to hazards.
· Driving too fast or too slowly.
· Driving in the wrong lane.
· Running over the curb.
· Weaving.
2.22.2 Other drugs
Besides alcohol, other legal and illegal drugs
are being used more often. Laws prohibit
possession or use of many drugs while on
duty. They prohibit being under the influence
of any "controlled substance"; amphetamines
(including "pep pills," "uppers" and
"bennies"), narcotics or any other substance
that can make the driver unsafe. This could
include a variety of prescription and over-
the-counter drugs (cold medicines) which
may make the driver drowsy or otherwise
affect safe driving ability. Possession and
use of a drug given to a driver by a doctor is
permitted if the doctor informs the driver
that it will not affect safe driving ability.
Pay attention to warning labels of legitimate
drugs and medicines and to doctor's
orders regarding possible effects. Avoid
illegal drugs. Don't use any drug that hides
fatigue­the only cure for fatigue is rest.
Alcohol can make the effects of other drugs
much worse. The safest rule is don't mix
drugs with driving at all.
Use of drugs can lead to traffic crashes
resulting in death, injury and property
damage. It can lead to arrest, fines and jail
sentences. It can also mean the end of a
person's driving career.
2.22.3 Illness
Once in a while, you may become so ill that
you cannot operate a motor vehicle safely. If
this happens, you must not drive. In case of
an emergency, you may drive to the nearest
place where you can safely stop.
2.23 Hazardous
materials rules for all
commercial drivers
All drivers should know something about
hazardous materials. You must be able to
recognize hazardous cargo and you must
know whether or not you can haul it without
having a hazardous materials endorsement
on your CDL license.
2.23.1 What are
hazardous materials?
Hazardous materials are products that pose
a risk to health, safety and property during
transportation. See Figure 2-24.
Figure 2-24: Hazard Class Definitions
CLASS CLASS NAME EXAMPLES
1 Explosives
Dynamite
Fireworks
Ammunition
2 Gases
Propane
Helium
Oxygen
3 Flammable Gasoline
Acetone
4 Flammable Solids Matches
Fuses
5 Oxidizers
Ammonium
Nitrate
Hydrogen
Peroxide
COVER 95 CONTENTS
CLASS CLASS NAME EXAMPLES
6 Poisons Pesticides
Arsenic
7 Radioactive
Uranium
Plutonium
8 Corrosives
Hydrochloric
Acid
Battery Fluid
9 Miscellaneous
Hazardous Materials
Formaldehyde
Asbestos
None
ORM-D (Other
Regulated Material-
Domestic)
Hair Spray
Charcoal
None Combustible Liquids Fuel Oils
Lighter Fluid
2.23.2 Why are there rules?
You must follow the many rules about
transporting hazardous materials. The
intent of the rules is to:
· Contain the product.
· Communicate the risk.
· Ensure safe drivers and equipment.
To contain the product:
Many hazardous products can injure or kill
on contact. To protect drivers and others
from contact, the rules tell shippers how to
package safely. Similar rules tell drivers how
to load, transport and unload bulk tanks.
These are containment rules.
To communicate the risk:
The shipper uses a shipping paper and
diamond-shaped hazard labels to warn
dockworkers and drivers of the risk.
After an accident or hazardous material
spill or leak, you may be injured and
unable to communicate the hazards of the
materials you are transporting. Firefighters
and police can prevent or reduce the
amount of damage or injury at the scene
if they know what hazardous materials
are being carried. Your life, and the lives
of others, may depend on quickly locating
the hazardous materials shipping papers.
For that reason, you must identify shipping
papers related to hazardous materials or
keep them on top of other shipping papers.
You must also keep shipping papers:
· In a pouch on the driver's door, or
· In clear view within reach while driving,
or
· On the driver's seat when you are out of
the vehicle.
2.23.3 Lists of regulated
products
Placards are used to warn others of
hazardous materials. Placards are signs
put on the outside of a vehicle that identify
the hazard class of the cargo. A placarded
vehicle must have at least four identical
placards. They are put on the front, rear and
both sides. Placards must be readable from
all four directions. They must be at least
9.8" (250mm) inches square, turned upright
on a point, in a diamond shape. See Figure
2-25. Cargo tanks and other bulk packaging
display the identification number of their
contents on placards or orange panels.
COVER 96 CONTENTS
Figure 2-25: Examples of Placards
Identification numbers are a four digit
code used by first responders to identify
hazardous materials. An identification
number may be used to identify more than
one chemical on shipping papers. The
identification number will be preceded by
the letters "NA" or "UN." The U.S. DOT
Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG)
lists the chemicals and the identification
numbers assigned to them.
Not all vehicles carrying hazardous
materials need to have placards. The rules
about placards are given in Section 9 of this
manual. You can drive a vehicle that carries
hazardous materials if it does not require
placards. If it requires placards, you cannot
drive it unless your driver license has the
hazardous materials endorsement.
The rules require all drivers of placarded
vehicles to learn how to safely load and
transport hazardous products. They must
have a commercial driver license with the
hazardous materials endorsement. To get
the required endorsement you must pass a
written test on material found in Section
9. A tank endorsement is required for any
commercial vehicle that is designed to
transport any liquid or gaseous materials
in a tank or tanks having an individual
rated capacity of more than 119 gallons
and an aggregate capacity of 1,000 gallons
or more that is either permanently or
temporarily attached to the vehicle or
chassis. The liquid or gas does not have to
be a hazardous material.
Drivers who need the hazardous materials
endorsement must learn the placard rules.
If you do not know if your vehicle needs
placards, ask your employer. Never drive
a vehicle needing placards unless
you have the hazardous materials
endorsement. To do so is a crime. When
stopped, you will be cited and you will not
be allowed to drive your truck. It will cost
you time and money. A failure to placard
when needed will risk your life and others
if you have a crash. Emergency help will not
know of your hazardous cargo.
Hazardous materials drivers must also
know which products they can load together
and which they can not. These rules are also
in Section 9. Before loading a truck with
more than one type of product, you must
know if it is safe to load them together. If
you do not know, ask your employer and
consult the regulations.
Test your knowledge
1. True or False? Common medicines for
colds can make you sleepy.
2. True or False? Coffee and a little fresh air
will help a drinker sober up.
3. What is a hazardous materials placard?
4. Why are placards used?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 2.22 and 2.23.
COVER 97 CONTENTS
SECTION 3:
TRANSPORTING CARGO
SAFELY
This section covers:
· Inspecting Cargo
· Cargo Weight and Balance
· Securing Cargo
· Cargo Needing Special Attention
This section tells you about hauling cargo
safely. You must understand basic cargo
safety rules to get a CDL.
If you load cargo wrong or do not secure it,
it can be a danger to others and yourself.
Loose cargo that falls off a vehicle can cause
traffic problems and others could be hurt
or killed. Loose cargo could hurt or kill you
during a quick stop or crash. Your vehicle
could be damaged by an overload. Steering
could be affected by how a vehicle is loaded,
making it more difficult to control the
vehicle.
Whether or not you load and secure the
cargo yourself, you are responsible for:
· Inspecting your cargo.
· Recognizing overloads and poorly
balanced weight.
· Knowing your cargo is properly secured
and does not obscure your view ahead or
to the sides.
· Knowing your cargo does not restrict
your access to emergency equipment.
These are discussed below.
NOTE: If you intend to carry hazardous
material that requires placards on your
vehicle, you must also have a hazardous
materials endorsement. Section 9 in Volume
2 has the information you need to pass the
hazardous materials test.
3.1 Inspecting cargo
As part of your vehicle inspection, make
sure the truck is not overloaded and the
cargo is balanced and secured properly.
After starting
Inspect the cargo and its securing devices
again within the first 50 miles after
beginning a trip. Make any adjustments
needed.
Re-check
Re-check the cargo and securing devices as
often as necessary during a trip to keep the
load secure. You need to inspect again:
· After you have driven for 3 hours or 150
miles.
· After every break you take during
driving.
Federal, state and local regulations for
commercial vehicle weight, securing cargo,
covering loads and where you can drive
large vehicles vary from place to place.
Know the rules where you will be driving.
3.2 Weight and balance
You are responsible for not being
overloaded. The following are some
definitions of weight you should know.
3.2.1 Definitions you
should know
Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
The value specified by the manufacturer as
the loaded weight of a single vehicle.
Gross combination weight rating
(GCWR)
The value specified by the manufacturer of
the power unit, if the value is displayed on
the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard
(FMVSS) certification label; or the sum of
the gross vehicle weight ratings (GVWRs)
COVER 98 CONTENTS
or the gross vehicle weights (GVWs) of the
power unit and the towed unit(s), or any
combination thereof, that produces the
highest value.
Actual gross vehicle weights (GVWs) are
not used to determine whether a vehicle is
representative for the purpose of CDL skills
testing. Actual GVWs are used by roadside
enforcement to determine whether the
driver/vehicle is subject to CDL regulations.
Axle weight
The weight transmitted to the ground by
one axle or one set of axles.
Tire load
The maximum safe weight a tire can carry
at a specified pressure. This rating is stated
on the side of each tire.
Suspension systems
Suspension systems have a manufacturer's
weight capacity rating.
Coupling device capacity
Coupling devices are rated for the maximum
weight they can pull and/or carry.
3.2.2 Legal weight limits
You must keep weights within legal limits.
States have maximums for GVWRs, GCWRs
and axle weights. Often, maximum axle
weights are set by a bridge formula. A bridge
formula permits less maximum axle weight
for axles that are closer together. This is to
prevent overloading bridges and roadways.
Overloading can have bad effects on
steering, braking and speed control.
Overloaded trucks need to go very slowly on
upgrades. Worse, they may gain too much
speed on downgrades. Stopping distance
increases. Brakes can fail when they are
forced to work too hard.
During bad weather or in mountains, it may
not be safe to operate at legal maximum
weights. Take this into account before
driving.
3.3.3 Don't be top heavy
The height of the vehicle's center of gravity
is very important for safe handling. A high
center of gravity (cargo piled up high or
heavy cargo on top) means you are more
likely to tip over. It is most dangerous in
curves or if you have to swerve to avoid a
hazard. It is very important to distribute
the cargo so it is as low as possible. Put
the heaviest parts of the cargo under the
lightest parts.
3.2.4 Balance the weight
Poor weight balance can make vehicle
handling unsafe. Too much weight on the
steering axle can cause hard steering. It
can damage the steering axle and tires.
Underloaded front axles (caused by shifting
weight too far to the rear) can make the
steering axle weight too light to steer safely.
Too little weight on the driving axles can
cause poor traction. The drive wheels may
spin easily. During bad weather, the truck
may not be able to keep going. Weight that
is loaded so there is a high center of gravity
causes greater chance of rollover. On flatbed
vehicles, there is also a greater chance that
the load will shift to the side or fall off.
Figure 3-1 shows examples of the right and
wrong way to balance cargo weight.
COVER 99 CONTENTS
Figure 3-1: Always load cargo the right way!
RIGHT WRONG
Test your knowledge
1. For what four things related to cargo are
drivers responsible?
2. How often must you stop while on the
road to check your cargo?
3. How is Gross Combination Weight
Rating different from Gross Combination
Weight?
4. Name two situations where legal
maximum weights may not be safe.
5. What can happen if you don't have
enough weight on the front axle?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 3.1 and 3.2.
3.3 Securing cargo
3.3.1 Blocking and bracing
Blocking is used in the front, back, and/
or sides of a piece of cargo to keep it from
sliding. Blocking is shaped to fit snugly
against cargo. It is secured to the cargo deck
to prevent cargo movement.
Bracing is also used to prevent movement
of cargo. Bracing goes from the upper part
of the cargo to the floor and/or walls of the
cargo compartment.
3.3.2 Cargo tiedown
On flatbed trailers or trailers without
sides, cargo must be secured to keep it
from shifting or falling off. In closed vans,
tiedowns can also be important to prevent
cargo shifting that may affect the handling
of the vehicle. Tiedowns must be of the
proper type and proper strength. Federal
regulations require that the aggregate
working load limit of any securement system
used to secure an article or group of articles
against movement must be at least one-half
times the weight of the article or group of
articles. Proper tiedown equipment must
be used, including ropes, straps, chains
and tensioning devices (winches, ratchets,
clinching components). Tiedowns must be
attached to the vehicle correctly (hook, bolt,
rails, rings).
Figure 3-2: Tiedowns
Cargo should have at least one tiedown for
each 10 feet of cargo. Make sure you have
enough tiedowns to meet this need. No
matter how small the cargo, it should have
at least two tiedowns holding it.
There are special requirements for securing
various heavy pieces of metal. Find out what
they are if you are to carry such loads.
3.3.3 Header boards
Front end header boards ("headache racks")
protect you from your cargo in case of a
crash or emergency stop. Make sure the
front end structure is in good condition. The
front end structure should block the forward
movement of any cargo you carry.
COVER 100 CONTENTS
3.3.4 Covering cargo
There are two basic reasons for covering
cargo:
· To protect people from spilled cargo.
· To protect the cargo from weather.
Spill protection is a safety requirement in
many states. Be familiar with the laws of the
states in which you drive.
You should look at your cargo covers in the
mirrors from time to time while driving. A
flapping cover can tear loose, uncovering
the cargo and possibly blocking your view or
someone else's.
3.3.5 Sealed and
containerized loads
Containerized loads generally are used
when freight is carried part way by rail
or ship. Delivery by truck occurs at the
beginning and/or end of the journey. Some
containers have their own tiedown devices
or locks that attach directly to a special
frame. Others need to be loaded onto flat
bed trailers. They must be properly secured
just like any other cargo.
You cannot inspect sealed loads, but you
should check that you don't exceed gross
weight and axle weight limits.
3.4 Cargo needing
special attention
3.4.1 Dry bulk
Dry bulk tanks require special care because
they often have a high center of gravity and
the load can shift. Be extremely cautious
(slow and careful) going around curves and
making sharp turns.
3.4.2 Hanging meat
Hanging meat (suspended beef, pork,
lamb) in a refrigerated truck can be a very
unstable load with a high center of gravity.
Particular caution is needed on sharp curves
such as off ramps and on ramps. Go slowly.
3.4.3 Livestock
Livestock can move around in a trailer,
causing unsafe handling. With less than
a full load, use false bulkheads to keep
livestock bunched together. Even when
bunched, special care is necessary because
livestock can lean on curves. This shifts the
center of gravity and makes rollover more
likely.
3.4.4 Oversized loads
Over-length, over-width, and/or overweight
loads require special transit permits.
Driving is usually limited to certain times.
Special equipment may be necessary such as
"wide load" signs, flashing lights, flags, etc.
Such loads may require a police escort or
pilot vehicles bearing warning signs and/or
flashing lights. These special loads require
special driving care.
Test your knowledge
1. What is the minimum number of
tiedowns for any flat bed load?
2. What is the minimum number of
tiedowns for a 20 ft. load?
3. Name the two basic reasons for covering
cargo on an open bed.
4. What must you check before transporting
a sealed load?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 3.3 and 3.4.
COVER 101 CONTENTS
PART TWO
Section 4: Transporting passengers safely
Section 5: Air brakes
Section 6: Combination vehicles
Section 7: Doubles and triples
Section 8: Tank vehicles
Section 9: Hazardous materials
Section 10: School bus
SECTION 4:
TRANSPORTING
PASSENGERS SAFELY
This section covers:
· Vehicle Inspection
· Loading
· On the Road
· After-trip Vehicle Inspection
· Prohibited Practices
· Use of Brake-door Interlocks
Bus drivers must have a commercial driver
license if they drive a vehicle designed to
transport 16 or more persons, including the
driver.
Bus drivers must have a passenger
endorsement on their commercial driver
license. To get the endorsement you must
pass a knowledge test on Section 2 and
Section 4 of this manual. (If your bus has air
brakes, you must also pass a knowledge test
on Section 5.) You must also pass the skills
tests required for the class of vehicle you
plan to drive.
4.1 Vehicle inspection
Before driving your bus, you must be sure
it is safe. You must review the inspection
report made by the previous driver. Only if
defects reported earlier have been certified
as repaired or not needing to be repaired,
should you sign the previous driver's report.
This is your certification that the defects
reported earlier have been fixed.
4.1.1 Vehicle systems
Make sure these things are in working order
before driving:
· Service brakes, including air hose
couplings (if your bus has a trailer or
semitrailer).
· Parking brake.
· Steering mechanism.
· Lights and reflectors.
· Tires (front wheels must not have
recapped or re-grooved tires).
· Horn.
· Windshield wiper or wipers.
· Rear-vision mirror or mirrors.
· Coupling devices (if present).
· Wheels and rims.
· Emergency equipment.
Make sure your bus has the fire extinguisher
and emergency reflectors (3 reflective
triangles or at least 6 fusees or 3 liquid
burning flares) required by law. The bus
must also have spare electrical fuses, unless
equipped with circuit breakers.
4.1.2 Access doors and panels
As you check the outside of the bus, close
any open emergency exits. Also, close any
open access panels (for baggage, restroom
service, engine, etc.) before driving.
COVER 102 CONTENTS
4.1.3 Bus interior
People sometimes damage unattended
buses. Always check the interior of the bus
before driving to ensure rider safety. Aisles
and stairwells should always be clear. The
following parts of your bus must be in safe
working condition:
· Each handhold and railing.
· Floor covering.
· Signaling devices, including the restroom
emergency buzzer, if the bus has a
restroom.
· Emergency exit handles.
The seats must be safe for riders. All seats
must be securely fastened to the bus.
Never drive with an open emergency exit
door or window. The "Emergency Exit"
sign on an emergency door must be clearly
visible. If there is a red emergency door
light, it must work. Turn it on at night or any
other time you use your outside lights.
4.1.4 Roof hatches
You may lock some emergency roof hatches
in a partly open position for fresh air. Do
not leave them open as a regular practice.
Keep in mind the bus's higher clearance
while driving with them open.
4.1.5 Use your seatbelt!
The driver's seat should have a seat belt.
Always use it for safety.
4.2 Loading and trip start
Do not allow riders to leave carry-on
baggage in a doorway or aisle. There should
be nothing in the aisle that might trip other
riders. Secure baggage and freight in ways
that avoid damage and:
· Allow the driver to move freely and
easily.
· Allow riders to exit by any window or
door in an emergency.
· Protect riders from injury if carry-ons
fall or shift.
4.2.1 Hazardous materials
Watch for cargo or baggage containing
hazardous materials. Most hazardous
materials cannot be carried on a bus.
The Federal Hazardous Materials Table
shows which materials are hazardous. They
pose a risk to health, safety and property
during transportation. The rules require
shippers to mark containers of hazardous
material with the material's name, ID
number and hazard label. There are nine
different four inch, diamond-shaped hazard
labels. Watch for the diamond-shaped labels.
Do not transport any hazardous material
unless you are sure the rules allow it.
Figure 4-1: Hazard Class Definitions
CLASS CLASS NAME EXAMPLES
1 Explosives
Dynamite
Fireworks
Ammunition
2 Gases
Propane
Helium
Oxygen
3 Flammable Gasoline
Acetone
4 Flammable Solids Matches
Fuses
5 Oxidizers
Ammonium
Nitrate
Hydrogen
Peroxide
6 Poisons Pesticides
Arsenic
7 Radioactive Uranium
Plutonium
COVER 103 CONTENTS
8 Corrosives
Hydrochloric
Acid
Battery Fluid
9 Miscellaneous
Hazardous Materials
Formaldehyde
Asbestos
None
ORM-D (Other
Regulated Material-
Domestic)
Hair Spray
Charcoal
None Combustible Liquids Fuel Oils
Lighter Fluid
4.2.2 Forbidden
hazardous materials
Buses may carry small-arms ammunition
labeled ORM-D, emergency hospital
supplies and drugs. You can carry small
amounts of some other hazardous materials
if the shipper cannot send them any other
way. Buses must never carry:
· Division 2.3 poison gas, liquid Class 6
poison, tear gas, irritating material.
· More than 100 pounds of solid Class 6
poisons.
· Explosives in the space occupied by
people, except small arms ammunition.
· Labeled radioactive materials in the
space occupied by people.
· More than 500 pounds total of allowed
hazardous materials and no more than
100 pounds of any one class.
Riders sometimes board a bus with an
unlabeled hazardous material. Do not allow
riders to carry on common hazards such as
car batteries or gasoline.
4.2.3 Standee line
No rider may stand forward of the rear of
the driver's seat. Buses designed to allow
standing must have a 2 inch line on the
floor or some other means of showing riders
where they cannot stand. This is called the
standee line. All standing riders must stay
behind it.
4.2.4 At your destination
When arriving at the destination or
intermediate stops announce:
· The location
· Reason for stopping
· Next departure time, and
· Bus number.
Remind riders to take carry-ons with them
if they get off the bus. If the aisle is on a
lower level than the seats, remind riders of
the step-down. It is best to tell them before
coming to a complete stop.
Charter bus drivers should not allow riders
on the bus until departure time. This will
help prevent theft or vandalism of the bus.
Test your knowledge
1. Name some things to check in the
interior of a bus during a vehicle
inspection.
2. What are some hazardous materials you
can transport by bus?
3. What are some hazardous materials you
can not transport by bus?
4. What is a standee line?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 4.1 and 4.2.
COVER 104 CONTENTS
4.3 On the road
4.3.1 Passenger supervision
Many charter and intercity carriers have
passenger comfort and safety rules. Mention
rules about smoking, drinking or use of
radio and MP3 players at the start of the
trip. Explaining the rules at the start will
help to avoid trouble later on.
While driving, scan the interior of your bus
as well as the road ahead, to the sides and
to the rear. You may need to remind riders
about rules, or to keep arms and heads
inside the bus.
4.3.2 At stops
Riders can stumble when getting on or off,
and when the bus starts or stops. Caution
riders to watch their step when leaving the
bus. Wait for them to sit down or brace
themselves before starting. Starting and
stopping should be as smooth as possible to
avoid rider injury.
Occasionally, you may have a drunk or
disruptive rider. You must ensure this
rider's safety as well as that of others. Don't
discharge such riders where it would be
unsafe for them. It may be safer at the next
scheduled stop or a well-lighted area where
there are other people. Many carriers have
guidelines for handling disruptive riders.
4.3.3 Common crashes
Bus crashes often happen at intersections.
Use caution, even if a signal or stop sign
controls other traffic. School and mass
transit buses sometimes scrape off mirrors
or hit passing vehicles when pulling out
from a bus stop. Remember the clearance
your bus needs, and watch for poles and
tree limbs at stops. Know the size of the
gap your bus needs to accelerate and merge
with traffic. Wait for the gap to open before
leaving the stop. Never assume other drivers
will brake to give you room when you signal
or start to pull out.
4.3.4 Speed on curves
Crashes on curves that kill people and
destroy buses result from excessive speed,
often when rain or snow has made the road
slippery. Every banked curve has a safe
"design speed." In good weather, the posted
speed is safe for cars but it may be too high
for many buses. With good traction, the bus
may roll over; with poor traction, it might
slide off the curve. Reduce speed for curves!
If your bus leans toward the outside on a
banked curve, you are driving too fast.
4.3.5 Railroad crossings stops
Stop at railroad crossings. Stop your bus
between 15 and 50 feet before railroad
crossings. Listen and look in both directions
for trains. You should open your forward
door if it improves your ability to see or hear
an approaching train. Before crossing after
a train has passed, make sure there isn't
another train coming in the other direction
on other tracks. If your bus has a manual
transmission, never change gears while
crossing the tracks.
You do not need to stop, but must slow down
and carefully check for other vehicles:
· At street car crossings.
· Where a policeman or flagman is
directing traffic.
· If a traffic signal shows green,
· At crossings marked as "exempt" or
"abandoned."
WISCONSIN NOTE: In Wisconsin,
school buses must stop at tracks used for
industrial switching.
COVER 105 CONTENTS
4.3.6 Drawbridges
Stop at drawbridges that do not have a
signal light or traffic control attendant. Stop
at least 50 feet before the draw of the bridge.
Look to make sure the draw is completely
closed before crossing. You do not need to
stop, but must slow down and make sure it's
safe, when:
· There is a traffic light showing green.
· The bridge has an attendant or traffic
officer who controls traffic whenever the
bridge opens.
4.4 After-trip vehicle
inspection
Inspect your bus at the end of each shift. If
you work for an interstate carrier, you must
complete a written inspection report for each
bus driven. The report must specify each bus
and list any defect that would affect safety or
result in a breakdown. If there are no defects,
the report should say so.
Riders sometimes damage safety-related
parts such as handholds, seats, emergency
exits and windows. If you report this
damage at the end of a shift, mechanics can
make repairs before the bus goes out again.
Mass transit drivers should also make sure
passenger signaling devices and brake-door
interlocks work properly.
4.5 Prohibited practices
Avoid fueling your bus with riders on board
unless absolutely necessary. Never refuel in
a closed building with riders on board.
Don't talk with riders or engage in any other
distracting activity while driving.
Do not tow or push a disabled bus with riders
aboard the vehicle, unless getting off would
be unsafe. Only tow or push the bus to the
nearest safe spot to discharge passengers.
Follow your employer's guidelines on towing
or pushing disabled buses.
4.6 Use of brake-
door interlocks
Urban mass transit coaches may have a
brake and accelerator interlock system. The
interlock applies the brakes and holds the
throttle in idle position when the rear door
is open. The interlock releases when you
close the rear door. Do not use this safety
feature in place of the parking brake.
Test your knowledge
1. Does it matter where you make a
disruptive passenger get off the bus?
2. How far from a railroad crossing should
you stop?
3. When must you stop before crossing a
drawbridge?
4. Describe from memory the "prohibited
practices" listed in the manual.
5. True or False? The rear door of a transit
bus has to be open to put on the parking
brake
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 4.3, 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6.
COVER 106 CONTENTS
SECTION 5: AIR BRAKES
This section covers:
· Air Brake System Parts
· Dual Air Brake Systems
· Inspecting Air Brakes
· Using Air Brakes
This section tells you about air brakes. If
you want to drive a truck or bus with air
brakes or pull a trailer with air brakes, you
should study this section. If you want to pull
a trailer with air brakes, you should also
study Section 6: Combination vehicles
Air brakes use compressed air to make
the brakes work. Air brakes are a good
and safe way of stopping large and heavy
vehicles, but the brakes must be well
maintained and properly used.
Air brakes are really three different braking
systems: service brake, parking brake and
emergency brake systems.
· The service brake system applies and
releases the brakes when you use the
brake pedal during normal driving.
· The parking brake system applies and
releases the parking brakes when you
use the parking brake control.
· The emergency brake system uses
parts of the service and parking brake
systems to stop the vehicle in the event
of a brake system failure.
The parts of these systems are discussed in
greater detail below.
5.1 The parts of an
air brake system
There are many parts to an air brake
system. You should know about the parts
discussed here.
5.1.1 Air compressor
The air compressor pumps air into the
air storage tanks (reservoirs). The air
compressor is connected to the engine
through gears or a V-belt. The compressor
may be air cooled or may be cooled by the
engine cooling system. It may have its own
oil supply or be lubricated by engine oil. If
the compressor has its own oil supply, check
the oil level before driving.
5.1.2 Air compressor governor
The governor controls when the air
compressor will pump air into the air
storage tanks. When air tank pressure rises
to the "cut-out" level (around 125 pounds
per square inch or "psi"), the governor stops
the compressor from pumping air. When the
tank pressure falls to the "cut-in" pressure
(around 100 psi), the governor allows the
compressor to start pumping again.
5.1.3 Air storage tanks
Air storage tanks are used to hold
compressed air. The number and size of air
tanks varies among vehicles. The tanks will
hold enough air to allow the brakes to be
used several times even if the compressor
stops working.
5.1.4 Air tank drains
Compressed air usually has some water and
some compressor oil in it, which is bad for
the air brake system. For example, the water
can freeze in cold weather and cause brake
failure. The water and oil tend to collect
COVER 107 CONTENTS
in the bottom of the air tank. Be sure that
you drain the air tanks completely. Each air
tank is equipped with a drain valve in the
bottom. There are two types:
· Manually operated by turning a quarter
turn, shown in Figure 5-1, or by pulling a
cable. You must drain the tanks yourself
at the end of each day of driving.
· Automatic­the water and oil is
automatically expelled. They may be
equipped for manual draining as well.
The automatic types are available with
electric heating devices. These help prevent
freeze up of the automatic drain in cold
weather.
Figure 5-1: Manual Drain Valve
Manual Draining Valve
Air Tank
5.1.5 Alcohol evaporator
Some air brake systems have an alcohol
evaporator to put alcohol into the air system.
This helps to reduce the risk of ice in air
brake valves and other parts during cold
weather. Ice inside the system can make the
brakes stop working.
Check the alcohol container and fill up as
necessary, every day during cold weather.
Daily air tank drainage is still needed
to get rid of water and oil (unless the
system has automatic drain valves).
5.1.6 Safety valve
A safety relief valve is installed in the first
tank the air compressor pumps air to. The
safety valve protects the tank and the rest
of the system from too much pressure. The
valve is usually set to open at 150 psi. If
the safety valve releases air, something is
wrong. Have the fault fixed by a mechanic.
5.1.7 The brake pedal
You put on the brakes by pushing down the
brake pedal. (It is also called the foot valve
or treadle valve.) Pushing the pedal down
harder applies more air pressure. Letting up
on the brake pedal reduces the air pressure
and releases the brakes. Releasing the
brakes lets some compressed air go out of
the system, so the air pressure in the tanks
is reduced. It must be made up by the air
compressor. Pressing and releasing the
pedal unnecessarily can let air out faster
than the compressor can replace it. If the
pressure gets too low, the brakes won't work.
5.1.8 Foundation brakes
Foundation brakes are used at each wheel.
The most common type is the S-cam drum
brake, shown in Figure 5-2. The parts of the
brake are discussed here:
· Brake drums, shoes and linings. Brake
drums are located on each end of the
vehicle's axles. The wheels are bolted to
the drums. The braking mechanism is
inside the drum. To stop, the brake shoes
and linings are pushed against the inside
of the drum. This causes friction which
slows the vehicle (and creates heat). The
heat a drum can take without damage
depends on how hard and how long the
brakes are used. Too much heat can
make the brakes stop working.
COVER 108 CONTENTS
Brake Chamber
Slack Adjuster
Push Rod
Adjusting Nut
Brake Cam
Cam Roller
Brake
Brake Shoe Lining
Return Spring
Axle
Brake Drum
5.1.9 Supply pressure gauges
All vehicles with air brakes have a pressure
gauge connected to the air tank. If the
vehicle has a dual air brake system, there
will be a gauge for each half of the system
or a single gauge with two needles. Dual
systems will be discussed later. These
gauges tell you how much pressure is in the
air tanks.
5.1.10 Application
pressure gauge
This gauge shows how much air pressure
you are applying to the brakes. (Note: this
gauge is not on all vehicles.) Increasing
application pressure to hold the same speed
means the brakes are fading. You should
slow down and use a lower gear. The need
for increased pressure can also be caused
by brakes out of adjustment, air leaks or
mechanical problems.
5.1.11 Low air pressure warning
A low air pressure warning signal is
required on vehicles with air brakes. A
warning signal you can see must come on
before the air pressure in the tanks falls
below 60 psi­or one half the compressor
governor cut-out pressure on older vehicles.
· S-cam brakes. When you push the
brake pedal, air is let into each brake
chamber. Air pressure pushes the rod
out, moving the slack adjuster, thus
twisting the brake camshaft. This turns
the S-cam (so called because it is shaped
like the letter "S"). The S-cam forces
the brake shoes away from one another
and presses them against the inside of
the brake drum. When you release the
brake pedal, the S-cam rotates back and
a spring pulls the brake shoes away from
the drum, letting the wheels roll freely
again. See Figure 5-2.
· Wedge brakes. In this type of brake,
the brake chamber push rod pushes a
wedge directly between the ends of two
brake shoes. This shoves them apart
and against the inside of the brake
drum. Wedge brakes may have a single
brake chamber or two brake chambers,
pushing wedges in at both ends of the
brake shoes. Wedge type brakes may be
self-adjusting or may require manual
adjustment.
· Disc brakes. In air-operated disc brakes,
air pressure acts on a brake chamber and
slack adjuster, like S-cam brakes. But
instead of the S-cam, a "power screw" is
used. The pressure of the brake chamber
on the slack adjuster turns the power
screw. The power screw clamps the disc
or rotor between the brake lining pads of
a caliper, similar to a large C-clamp.
Wedge brakes and disc brakes are less
common than S-cam brakes.
Figure 5-2: S-cam Drum Brake
COVER 109 CONTENTS
The warning is usually a red light. A buzzer
may also come on.
Another type of warning is the "wig wag."
This device drops a mechanical arm into
your view when the pressure in the system
drops below 60 psi. An automatic wig wag
will rise out of your view when the pressure
in the system goes above 60 psi. The manual
reset type must be placed in the "out of
view" position manually. It will not stay
in place until the pressure in the system is
above 60 psi.
On large buses it is common for the low
pressure warning devices to signal at 80-
85 psi.
5.1.12 Stop light switch
Drivers behind you must be warned when
you put on your brakes. The air brake system
does this with an electric switch that works
by air pressure. The switch turns on the
brake lights when you put on the air brakes.
5.1.13 Front brake limiting valve
Some older vehicles (made before 1975) have
a front brake limiting valve and a control
in the cab. The control is usually marked
"normal" and "slippery." When you put
the control in the "slippery" position, the
limiting valve cuts the "normal" air pressure
to the front brakes by half. Limiting valves
were used to reduce the chance of the
front wheels skidding on slippery surfaces.
However, they actually reduce the stopping
power of the vehicle. Front wheel braking is
good under all conditions. Tests have shown
front wheel skids from braking are not likely
even on ice. Make sure the control is in
the "normal" position to have normal
stopping power.
Many vehicles have automatic front wheel
limiting valves. They reduce the air to the
front brakes except when the brakes are put
on very hard (60 psi or more application
pressure). These valves cannot be controlled
by the driver.
5.1.14 Spring brakes
All trucks, truck tractors and buses must
be equipped with emergency brakes and
parking brakes. They must be held on by
mechanical force (because air pressure can
eventually leak away). Spring brakes are
usually used to meet these needs. When
driving, powerful springs are held back by
air pressure. If the air pressure is removed,
the springs put on the brakes. A parking
brake control in the cab allows the driver to
let the air out of the spring brakes. This lets
the springs put the brakes on. A leak in the
air brake system that causes all the air to be
lost will also cause the springs to put on the
brakes.
Tractor and straight truck spring brakes
will come fully on when air pressure drops
to a range of 20 to 45 psi (typically 20 to 30
psi). Do not wait for the brakes to come on
automatically. When the low air pressure
warning light and/or buzzer first come on,
bring the vehicle to a safe stop right away,
while you can still control the brakes.
The braking power of spring brakes depends
on the brakes being in adjustment. If the
brakes are not adjusted properly, neither the
regular brakes nor the emergency/parking
brakes will work right.
COVER 110 CONTENTS
5.1.15 Parking brake controls
In newer vehicles with air brakes, you put
on the parking brakes using a diamond-
shaped, yellow, push/pull control knob.
You pull the knob out to put the parking
brakes (spring brakes) on and push it in to
release them. On older vehicles, the parking
brakes may be controlled by a lever. Use the
parking brakes whenever you park.
CAUTION: Never push the brake pedal
down when the spring brakes are on. If you
do, the brakes could be damaged by the
combined forces of the springs and the air
pressure. Many brake systems are designed
so this will not happen. But not all systems
are set up that way and those that are may
not always work. It is much better to develop
the habit of not pushing the brake pedal
down when the spring brakes are on.
Modulating control valves
In some vehicles a control handle on the
dash board may be used to apply the spring
brakes gradually. This is called a modulating
valve. It is spring loaded so you have a feel
for the braking action. The more you move
the control lever, the harder the spring
brakes come on. They work this way so you
can control the spring brakes if the service
brakes fail. When parking a vehicle with a
modulating control valve, move the lever as
far as it will go and hold it in place with the
locking device.
Dual parking control valves
When main air pressure is lost, the spring
brakes come on. Some vehicles, such as
buses, have a separate air tank which
can be used to release the spring brakes.
This is so you can move the vehicle in an
emergency. One of the valves is a push-
pull type and is used to put on the spring
brakes for parking. The other valve is spring
loaded in the "out" position. When you
push the control in, air from the separate
air tank releases the spring brakes so you
can move. When you release the button, the
spring brakes come on again. There is only
enough air in the separate tank to do this a
few times. Therefore, plan carefully when
moving. Otherwise, you may be stopped in
a dangerous location when the separate air
supply runs out.
Figure 5-3: Tractor Protection Valve and
Emergency Trailer Brake Operation
Tractor Protection Valve
· Provides air supply.
· Closes automatically if air supply drops
when driving.
The parking brakes, when applied, close the
tractor protection valve and set the spring
brakes at the same time.
BRAKE
RELEASE
PULL TO APPLY
PUSH TO HOLD
EMERGENCY SPRING
BRAKE RELEASE
PULL TO APPLY
TRACTOR
PROTECTION
PULL TO APPLY
PARKING
BRAKES
PULL TO APPLY
BLUE
PUSH AND
HOLD
RED
PUSH TO
RELEASE
YELLOW
PUSH TO
RELEASE
PARKING
BRAKES
PULL TO APPLY
PUSH TO
RELEASE
TRAILER
AIR SUPPLY
PU
SH TO CHAR
GE
NO
T
FOR PARKI
N
G
COVER 111 CONTENTS
5.1.16 Antilock braking systems (ABS)
Truck tractors with air brakes built on or
after March 1, 1997 and other air brakes
vehicles, (trucks, buses, trailers and converter
dollies) built on or after March 1, 1998 are
required to be equipped with antilock brakes.
Many commercial vehicles built before these
dates have been voluntarily equipped with
ABS. Check the certification label for the date
of manufacture to determine if your vehicle
is equipped with ABS. ABS is a computerized
system that keeps your wheels from locking
up during hard brake applications.
Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction
lamps to tell you if something is not working.
Tractors, trucks and buses will have
yellow ABS malfunction lamps on the
instrument panel.
Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction
lamps on the left side, either on the front or
rear corner. Dollies manufactured on or after
March 1, 1998 are required to have a lamp on
the left side.
On newer vehicles, the malfunction lamp
comes on at start-up for a bulb check and
then goes out quickly. On older systems, the
lamp could stay on until you are driving over
5 mph.
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check or
goes on once you are under way, you may
have lost ABS control at one or more wheels.
In the case of towed units manufactured
before it was required by the Department of
Transportation, it may be difficult to tell if
the unit is equipped with ABS. Look under
the vehicle for the electronic control unit
(ECU) and wheel speed sensor wires coming
from the back of the brakes.
Figure 5-4: Air Brake System Components and Location (Single Circuit System)
Hand
Valve
Foot
Valve
Pressure
Gauge
Compressor
One-Way
Check Valve
Low Pressure
Warning Buzzer
and Switch
Main
Reservoirs
Tractor Parking
Brake Valve (Blue)
Emergency Valve
Parking Maxi-Brake
Spring Brake
Tractor Protection
Valve
Emergency
Glad Hands
Emergency
Relay Valve
Service
Quick
Release
Valve
Trailer
Reservoir
Trailer
Brake
Chambers
Highway
Valve
Tractor Trailer
Parking Brake
and Emergency
Brake Valve (Yellow)
Front
Brakes
Safety Valve
Dry
Wet
COVER 112 CONTENTS
ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It
does not decrease or increase your normal
braking capability. ABS only activates when
wheels are about to lock up.
ABS does not necessarily shorten your
stopping distance but it does help you
keep the vehicle under control during hard
braking.
Test your knowledge
1. Why must air tanks be drained?
2. What is a supply pressure gauge used
for?
3. True or False? All vehicles with air
brakes must have a low air pressure
warning signal.
4. What are spring brakes?
5. True or False? Front wheel brakes are
good under all conditions.
6. How do you know if your vehicle is
equipped with antilock brakes?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsection 5.1.
5.2 Dual air brakes
Most newer heavy duty vehicles use dual air
brake systems for safety. A dual air brake
system has two separate air brake systems
which use a single set of brake controls.
Each system has its own air tanks, hoses,
lines, etc. One system typically operates the
regular brakes on the rear axle or axles. The
other system operates the regular brakes on
the front axle, and possibly one rear axle.
Both systems supply air to the trailer (if
there is one). The first system is called the
"primary" system. The other is called the
"secondary" system.
Before driving a vehicle with a dual air
system, allow time for the air compressor to
build up a minimum of 100 psi pressure in
both the primary and secondary systems.
Watch the primary and secondary air
pressure gauges (or needles, if the system
has two needles in one gauge). Pay attention
to the low air pressure warning light
and/or buzzer. The warning light and/or
buzzer should shut off when air pressure
in both systems rises to a value set by the
manufacturer. This value must be greater
than 60 psi.
The warning light and/or buzzer should
come on before the air pressure drops below
60 psi in either system. If this happens
while driving, you should stop right away
and safely park the vehicle. If one air system
is very low on pressure, either the front or
the rear brakes will not be operating fully.
This means it will take you longer to stop.
Bring the vehicle to a safe stop and have the
air brake system fixed.
5.3 Inspecting air
brake systems
You should use the basic seven step
inspection procedure described in Section
2 to inspect your vehicle. There are more
things to inspect on a vehicle with air brakes
than one without them. We discuss these
things below, in the order that they fit into
the seven-step method.
5.3.1 During step 2: Engine
compartment checks
Check air compressor drive belt (if
compressor is belt driven)
If the air compressor is belt-driven, check
the condition and tightness of the belt. The
belt should be in good condition.
COVER 113 CONTENTS
5.3.2 During step 5:
Walkaround inspection
Check slack adjusters on S-cam
brakes
Park on level ground and chock the wheels
to prevent the vehicle from moving. Release
the parking brakes so you can move the
slack adjusters. Use gloves and pull hard
on each slack adjuster that you can reach.
If a slack adjuster moves more than about
one inch where the push rod attaches to it,
it probably needs adjustment. Adjust it or
have it adjusted. Vehicles with too much
brake slack can be very hard to stop. Out-
of-adjustment brakes are the most common
problem found in roadside inspections. Be
safe. Check the slack adjusters.
All vehicles built since 1994 have automatic
slack adjustors. Even though automatic
slack adjustors adjust themselves during full
brake applications, they must be checked.
Automatic adjusters should not have to be
manually adjusted except when performing
maintenance on the brakes and during
installation of the slack adjusters. In a
vehicle equipped with automatic adjusters,
when the pushrod stroke exceeds the legal
brake adjustment limit, it is an indication
that a mechanical problem exists in the
adjuster itself, a problem with the related
foundation brake components, or that the
adjuster was improperly installed.
The manual adjustment of an automatic
adjuster to bring a brake pushrod stroke
within legal limits is generally masking
a mechanical problem and is not fixing
it. Further, routine adjustment of most
automatic adjusters will likely result in
premature wear of the adjuster itself. It is
recommended that when brakes equipped
with automatic adjusters are found to be out
of adjustment, the driver take the vehicle
to a repair facility as soon as possible to
have the problem corrected. The manual
adjustment of automatic slack adjusters is
dangerous because it may give the driver
a false sense of security regarding the
effectiveness of the braking system.
The manual adjustment of an automatic
adjuster should only be used as a temporary
measure to correct the adjustment in an
emergency situation as it is likely the brake
will soon be back out of adjustment since
this procedure usually does not fix the
underlying adjustment problem.
Automatic slack adjusters are made by
different manufacturers and do not all
operate the same. Therefore, the specific
manufacturer's Service Manual should be
consulted prior to troubleshooting a brake
adjustment problem.
Check brake drums (or discs), linings
and hoses
Brake drums (or discs) must not have cracks
longer than one half the width of the friction
area. Linings (friction material) must not
be loose or soaked with oil or grease. They
must not be dangerously thin. Mechanical
parts must be in place, not broken or
missing. Check the air hoses connected to
the brake chambers to make sure they aren't
cut or worn due to rubbing.
COVER 114 CONTENTS
5.3.3 Step 7: Final
air brake check
Do the following checks instead of the
hydraulic brake check shown in Section 2:
Step 7: Check Brake System.
Check air compressor governor cut-in
and cut-out pressures
Pumping by the air compressor should start
at about 100 psi and stop at about 125 psi.
(Check manufacturer's specifications.) Run
the engine at a fast idle. The air governor
should cut-out the air compressor at about
the manufacturer's specified pressure. The
air pressure shown by your gauge(s) will
stop rising. With the engine idling, step
on and off the brake to reduce the air tank
pressure. The compressor should cut-in at
about the manufacturer's specified cut-in
pressure. The pressure should begin to rise.
If the air governor does not work as
described above, it may need to be fixed.
A governor that does not work properly
may not keep enough air pressure for safe
driving.
Test air leakage rate
With a fully-charged air system (typically
125 psi), turn off the engine, chock your
wheels, if necessary, release the tractor
protection valve and parking brake (push
in), fully apply the foot brake and hold it for
one minute. Do not touch the button(s)/
valve(s) once released. Check the air
gauge to see if the air pressure drops more
than three pounds in one minute (single
vehicle) or four pounds in one minute
(combination vehicle). If the air pressure
falls more than three psi in one minute
for single vehicles (more than four psi for
combination vehicles), the air loss rate is
too much. Check for air leaks and fix before
driving the vehicle. Otherwise, you could
lose your brakes while driving.
Test low pressure warning signal
Shut the engine off when you have enough
air pressure so that the low pressure warning
signal is not on. Turn the electrical power on
and step on and off the brake pedal to reduce
air tank pressure. The low air pressure
warning signal must come on before the
pressure drops to less than 60 psi in the air
tank (or tank with the lowest air pressure, in
dual air systems). See Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Low Air Pressure Warning
Devices
Light
Some vehicles are equipped with
a "Wig-Wag" that drops into the
driver's view and will not stay up
in place until the desired air
pressure is restored.
Drop Arm
"Wig-Wag"
LOW PRESSURE WARNING
OFF
LOCK
LOW
OIL WATER
LOW
AIR
LOW
AIR
If the warning signal doesn't work, you
could lose air pressure and you would not
know it. This could cause sudden emergency
braking in a single-circuit air system. In
dual systems the stopping distance will be
increased. Only limited braking can be done
before the spring brakes come on.
COVER 115 CONTENTS
Check that spring brakes come on
automatically
Continue to fan off the air pressure by
stepping on and off the brake pedal to
reduce tank pressure. The tractor protection
valve and parking brake valve should close
(pop out) on a tractor-trailer combination
vehicle and the parking brake valve should
close (pop out) on other combination and
single vehicle types when the air pressure
falls to the manufacturer's specification
(20­45 psi). This will cause the spring
brakes to come on.
Check rate of air pressure buildup
When the engine is at operating rpms, the
pressure should build from 85 to 100 psi
within 45 seconds in dual air systems. (If
the vehicle has larger than minimum air
tanks, the buildup time can be longer and
still be safe. Check the manufacturer's
specifications.) In single air systems
(pre-1975), typical requirements are
pressure buildup from 50 to 90 psi within
3 minutes with the engine at an idle speed
of 600-900 rpms.
If air pressure does not build up fast enough,
your pressure may drop too low during
driving, requiring an emergency stop. Don't
drive until you get the problem fixed.
Test parking brake
Stop the vehicle, put the parking brake on
and gently pull against it in a low gear to
test that the parking brake will hold.
Test service brakes
Wait for normal air pressure, release the
parking brake, move the vehicle forward
slowly (about 5 mph) and apply the brakes
firmly using the brake pedal. Note any
vehicle "pulling" to one side, unusual feel or
delayed stopping action.
This test may show you problems which you
otherwise wouldn't know about until you
needed the brakes on the road.
Test your knowledge
1. What is a dual air brake system?
2. What are the slack adjusters?
3. How can you check slack adjusters?
4. How can you test the low pressure
warning signal?
5. What can you check to make sure
the spring brakes will come on
automatically?
6. What are the maximum leakage rates?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 5.2 and 5.3.
5.4 Using air brakes
5.4.1 Normal stops
Push the brake pedal down. Control
the pressure so the vehicle comes to a
smooth, safe stop. If you have a manual
transmission, don't push the clutch in until
the engine RPM is down close to idle. When
stopped, select a starting gear.
5.4.2 Braking with
antilock brakes
When you brake hard on slippery surfaces
in a vehicle without ABS, your wheels may
lock up. When your steering wheels lock up,
you lose steering control. When your other
wheels lock up, you may skid, jackknife or
even spin the vehicle.
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up. The
computer senses impending lockup, reduces
the braking pressure to a safe level and you
maintain control.
COVER 116 CONTENTS
You may or may not be able to stop faster
with ABS, but you should be able to steer
around an obstacle while braking and avoid
skids caused by over-braking.
Having ABS on only the tractor, only the
trailer or even on only one axle still gives
you more control over the vehicle during
braking. Brake normally.
When only the tractor has ABS, you should
be able to maintain steering control and
there is less chance of jackknifing. But keep
your eye on the trailer and let up on the
brakes (if you can safely do so) if it begins to
swing out.
When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer
is less likely to swing out but if you lose
steering control or start a tractor jackknife,
let up on the brakes (if you can safely do so)
until you gain control.
When you drive a tractor-trailer
combination with ABS, you should brake as
you always have. In other words:
· Use only the braking force necessary to
stop safely and stay in control.
· Brake the same way, regardless of
whether you have ABS on the tractor, the
trailer or both.
· As you slow down, monitor your tractor
and trailer and back off the brakes (if it
is safe to do so) to stay in control.
There is only one exception to this
procedure. If you always drive a straight
truck or combination with working ABS on
all axles, in an emergency stop you can fully
apply the brakes.
Without ABS, you still have normal brake
functions. Drive and brake as you always
have.
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you
still have regular brakes. Drive normally,
but get the system serviced soon.
5.4.3 Emergency stops
If somebody suddenly pulls out in front
of you, your natural response is to hit the
brakes. This is a good response if there's
enough distance to stop and you use the
brakes correctly.
You should brake in a way that will keep
your vehicle in a straight line and allow you
to turn if it becomes necessary. You can use
the "controlled braking" method or the "stab
braking" method.
Controlled braking
With this method, you apply the brakes
as hard as you can without locking the
wheels. Keep steering wheel movements
very small while doing this. If you need to
make a larger steering adjustment or if the
wheels lock, release the brakes. Reapply the
brakes as soon as you can.
Stab braking.
· Apply your brakes all the way.
· Release the brakes when the wheels lock
up.
· As soon as the wheels start rolling, apply
the brakes fully again. (It can take up
to one second for the wheels to start
rolling after you release the brakes. If you
reapply the brakes before the wheels start
rolling, the vehicle won't straighten out.).
NOTE: If you drive a vehicle with anti-
lock brakes, you should read and follow the
instructions found in the vehicle owner's
manual for emergency stops.
COVER 117 CONTENTS
5.4.4 Stopping distance
We discussed stopping distance in Section
2 under Speed and Stopping Distance. With
air brakes there is an added delay­"brake
lag." Brake lag is the time required for the
brakes to work after the brake pedal is
pushed. With hydraulic brakes (used on
cars and light/medium trucks), the brakes
work instantly. However, with air brakes, it
takes a little time (one-half second or more)
for the air to flow through the lines to the
brakes. Thus, the total stopping distance for
vehicles with air brake systems is made up
of four different factors.
Perception Distance
+ Reaction Distance
+ Brake Lag Distance
+ Effective Braking Distance
= Total Stopping Distance
The air brake lag distance at 55 mph on dry
pavement adds about 32 feet. So at 55 mph
for an average driver under good traction
and brake conditions, the total stopping
distance is over 450 feet. This is longer than
a football field.
5.4.5 Brake fading or failure
Brakes are designed so brake shoes or pads
rub against the brake drum or disks to slow
the vehicle. Braking creates heat, but brakes
are designed to take a lot of heat. However,
brakes can fade or fail from excessive heat
caused by using them too much and not
relying on the engine braking effect.
Excessive use of the service brakes results in
overheating and leads to brake fade. Brake
fade results from excessive heat causing
expansion of the brake drums and chemical
changes in the brake lining, which reduces
friction. As the overheated drums expand,
the brake shoes and linings have to move
farther to contact the drums and the force of
this contact is reduced. Continued overuse
may increase brake fade until the vehicle
cannot be slowed down or stopped at all.
Brake fade is also affected by adjustment.
To safely control a vehicle, every brake
must do its share of the work. Brakes out
of adjustment will stop doing their share
before those that are in adjustment. The
other brakes can then overheat and fade and
there will not be sufficient braking available
to control the vehicle(s). Brakes can get out
of adjustment quickly, especially when they
are hot. Check brake adjustment often.
5.4.6 Proper braking technique
Remember: the use of brakes on a long and/
or steep downgrade is only a supplement
to the braking effect of the engine. Once
the vehicle is in the proper low gear, the
following is the proper braking technique:
· Apply the brakes just hard enough to feel
a definite slowdown.
· When your speed has been reduced to
approximately five mph below your
"safe" speed, release the brakes. (This
brake application should last for about
three seconds.)
· When your speed has increased to your
"safe" speed, repeat steps 1 and 2.
For example, if your "safe" speed is 40 mph,
you would not apply the brakes until your
speed reaches 40 mph. You now apply the
brakes hard enough to gradually reduce your
speed to 35 mph and then release the brakes.
Repeat this as often as necessary until you
have reached the end of the downgrade.
COVER 118 CONTENTS
5.4.7 Low air pressure
If the low air pressure warning comes on,
stop and safely park your vehicle as
soon as possible. There might be an air
leak in the system. Controlled braking is
possible only while enough air remains
in the air tanks. The spring brakes will
come on when the air pressure drops into
the range of 20 to 45 psi. A heavily loaded
vehicle will take a long distance to stop
because the spring brakes do not work on all
axles. Lightly loaded vehicles or vehicles on
slippery roads may skid out of control when
the spring brakes come on. It is much safer
to stop while there is enough air in the tanks
to use the foot brakes.
5.4.8 Parking brakes
Any time you park, use the parking brakes,
except as noted below. Pull the parking
brake control knob out to apply the parking
brakes, push it in to release them. The
control will be a yellow, diamond-shaped
knob labeled "parking brakes" on newer
vehicles. On older vehicles, it may be a
round blue knob or some other shape
(including a lever that swings from side to
side or up and down).
Don't use the parking brakes if the brakes
are very hot (from just having come down
a steep grade) or if the brakes are very
wet in freezing temperatures. If they are
used while they are very hot, they can be
damaged by the heat. If they are used in
freezing temperatures when the brakes
are very wet, they can freeze so the vehicle
cannot move. Use wheel chocks on a level
surface to hold the vehicle. Let hot brakes
cool before using the parking brakes. If the
brakes are wet, use the brakes lightly while
driving in a low gear to heat and dry them.
If your vehicle does not have automatic air
tank drains, drain your air tanks at the end
of each working day to remove moisture and
oil. Otherwise, the brakes could fail.
Never leave your vehicle unattended without
applying the parking brakes or chocking the
wheels. Your vehicle might roll away and
cause injury and damage.
Test your knowledge
1. Why should you be in the proper gear
before starting down a hill?
2. What factors can cause brakes to fade or
fail?
3. True or False? The use of brakes on
a long steep downgrade is only a
supplement to the braking effect of the
engine.
4. True or False? If you are away from your
vehicle only a short time, you don't need
to use the parking brake.
5. How often should you drain air tanks?
6. How do you brake when you drive a
tractor-trailer combination with ABS?
7. True or False? You still have normal
brake functions if your ABS is not
working.
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsection 5.4.
COVER 119 CONTENTS
SECTION 6: COMBINATION
VEHICLES
This section covers:
· Driving Combination Vehicles Safely
· Combination Vehicle Air Brakes
· Antilock Braking Systems
· Coupling and Uncoupling
· Inspecting Combinations
This section provides information needed
to pass the tests for combination vehicles
(tractor-trailer, doubles, triples, straight
truck with trailer). The information is only
to give you the minimum knowledge needed
for driving common combination vehicles.
You should also study Section 7 if you need
to pass the tests for doubles-triples.
6.1 Driving combination
vehicles safely
Combination vehicles are usually heavier,
longer and require more driving skill than
single commercial vehicles. This means
that drivers of combination vehicles need
more knowledge and skill than drivers of
single vehicles. In this section, we talk about
some important safety factors that apply
specifically to combination vehicles.
6.1.1 Rollover risks
More than half of truck driver deaths in
crashes are the result of truck rollovers.
When more cargo is piled up in a truck, the
"center of gravity" moves higher up from the
road. The truck becomes easier to turn over.
Fully loaded rigs are ten times more likely
to roll over in a crash than empty rigs. The
following two things will help you prevent
rollover:
· Keep the cargo as close to the ground as
possible.
· Drive slowly around turns.
Keeping cargo low is even more important
in combination vehicles than in straight
trucks.
Keep the load centered on your rig. If the
load is to one side so it makes a trailer lean,
a rollover is more likely. Make sure your
cargo is centered and spread out as much as
possible. (Cargo distribution is covered in
Section 3 of this manual.).
Rollovers happen when you turn too fast.
Drive slowly around corners, on-ramps
and off-ramps. Avoid quick lane changes,
especially when fully loaded.
6.1.2 Steer gently
Trucks with trailers have a dangerous
"crack-the-whip" effect. When you make
a quick lane change, the crack-the-whip
effect can turn the trailer over. There are
many crashes where only the trailer has
overturned.
"Rearward amplification" causes the crack-
the-whip effect. Figure 6-1 shows eight
types of combination vehicles and the
rearward amplification each has in a quick
lane change. Rigs with the least crack-the-
whip effect are shown at the top and those
with the most, at the bottom. Rearward
amplification of 2.0 in the chart means that
the rear trailer is twice as likely to turn over
as the tractor. You can see that triples have
a rearward amplification of 3.5. This means
you can roll the last trailer of triples 3.5
times as easily as a five-axle tractor.
COVER 120 CONTENTS
5 axle tractor-semitrailer
with 45 ft trailer
3 axle tractor-semitrailer
with 27 ft trailer
turnpike double
45 ft trailers
B-train double
27 ft trailers
Rocky Mountain double
45 ft and 27 ft trailers
California truck full trailer
65 ft conventional
double 27 ft trailers
triple 27 ft trailers
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
(R. D. Ervin, R. L. Nisonger, C. C. MacAdam
and P. S. Fancher, "Influence of size and
weight variables on the stability and
properties of heavy trucks", University
of Michigan Transportation Research
Institute, 1983.)
Steer gently and smoothly when you are
pulling trailers. If you make a sudden
movement with your steering wheel, your
trailer could tip over. Follow far enough
behind other vehicles (at least 1 second for
each 10 feet of your vehicle length, plus
another second if going over 40 mph). Look
far enough down the road to avoid being
surprised and having to make a sudden lane
change. At night, drive slowly enough to see
obstacles with your headlights before it is too
late to change lanes or stop gently. Slow down
to a safe speed before going into a turn.
6.1.3 Brake early
Control your speed whether fully loaded
or empty. Large combination vehicles take
longer to stop when they are empty than
when they are fully loaded. When lightly
loaded, the very stiff suspension springs and
strong brakes give poor traction and make it
very easy to lock up the wheels. Your trailer
can swing out and strike other vehicles. Your
tractor can jackknife very quickly. See Figure
6-2. You must also be very careful about
driving "bobtail" tractors (tractors without
semitrailers). Tests have shown that bobtails
can be very hard to stop smoothly. It takes
them longer to stop than a tractor-semitrailer
loaded to maximum gross weight.
In any combination rig, allow lots of
following distance and look far ahead, so
you can brake early. Don't be caught by
surprise and have to make a "panic" stop.
Figure 6-2: Tractor Jackknife
Line of Travel
Direction of Slide
Rear Tractor Wheels
locked-up or spinning
Figure 6-1: Influence of Combination Type
on Rearward Amplification
COVER 121 CONTENTS
6.1.4 Railroad-
highway crossings
Railroad-highway crossings can also cause
problems, particularly when pulling trailers
with low underneath clearance.
These trailers can get stuck on raised
crossings:
· Low slung units (lowboy, car carrier,
moving van, possum-belly livestock
trailer).
· Single-axle tractor pulling a long trailer
with its landing gear set to accommodate
a tandem-axle tractor.
If for any reason you get stuck on the tracks,
get out of the vehicle and away from the
tracks. Check signposts or signal housing
at the crossing for emergency notification
information. Call 911 or other emergency
number. Give the location of the crossing
using all identifiable landmarks, especially
the DOT number, if posted.
6.1.5 Prevent trailer skids
When the wheels of a trailer lock up, the
trailer will tend to swing around. This is
more likely to happen when the trailer
is empty or lightly loaded. This type of
jackknife is often called a "trailer jackknife."
See Figure 6-3.
Figure 6-3: Trailer Jackknife
Line of Travel
Trailer Wheels
Locked and Sliding
The procedure for stopping a trailer skid is:
· Recognize the skid. The earliest and
best way to recognize the trailer has
started to skid is by seeing it in your
mirrors. Any time you apply the brakes
hard, check the mirrors to make sure
the trailer is staying where it should be.
Once the trailer swings out of your lane,
it is very difficult to prevent a jackknife.
· Stop using the brake. Release the brakes
to get traction back. Do not use the
trailer hand brake (if you have one) to
"straighten out the rig." This is the wrong
COVER 122 CONTENTS
thing to do since the brakes on the
trailer wheels caused the skid in the first
place. Once the trailer wheels grip the
road again, the trailer will start to follow
the tractor and straighten out.
6.1.6 Turn wide
When a vehicle goes around a corner, the
rear wheels follow a different path than the
front wheels. This is called offtracking
or "cheating." Figure 6-4 shows how
offtracking causes the path followed by a
tractor-semi to be wider than the rig itself.
Longer vehicles will offtrack more. The rear
wheels of the powered unit (truck or tractor)
will offtrack some and the rear wheels of
the trailer will offtrack even more. If there
is more than one trailer, the rear wheels of
the last trailer will offtrack the most. Steer
the front end wide enough around a corner
so the rear end does not run over the curb,
pedestrians, other vehicles, etc. However,
keep the rear of your vehicle close to the
curb. This will stop other drivers from
passing you on the right.
Figure 6-4: Offtracking in a 90-degree turn
Maximum width
of sweep path
Path followed by
innermost tire
Path followed by outside tire
If you cannot complete your turn without
entering another traffic lane, turn wide
as you complete the turn (Figure 6-5).
This is better than swinging wide to the
left (Figure 6-6) before starting the turn
because it will keep other drivers from
passing you on the right.
Figure 6-5: Turn this way so cars don't try to
pass you on the right.
Figure 6-6: Don't turn this way!
COVER 123 CONTENTS
6.1.7 Backing with a trailer
Backing with a trailer
When backing a car, straight truck, or bus,
you turn the top of the steering wheel in the
direction you want to go. When backing a
trailer, you turn the steering wheel in the
opposite direction. Once the trailer starts to
turn, you must turn the wheel the other way
to follow the trailer.
Whenever you back up with a trailer, try to
position your vehicle so you can back in a
straight line. If you must back on a curved
path, back to the driver's side so you can see.
Look at your path
Look at your line of travel before you begin.
Get out and walk around the vehicle. Check
your clearance to the sides and overhead, in
and near the path your vehicle.
Use mirrors on both sides
Check the outside mirrors on both sides
frequently. Get out of the vehicle and re-
inspect your path if you are unsure.
Back slowly
This will let you make corrections before
you get too far off course.
Correct drift immediately
As soon as you see the trailer getting off
the proper path, correct it by turning the
top of the steering wheel in the direction of
the drift.
Pull forward
When backing a trailer, make pull-ups to re-
position your vehicle as needed.
Test your knowledge
1. What two things are important to
prevent rollover?
2. When you turn suddenly while pulling
doubles, which trailer is most likely to
turn over?
3. Why should you not use the trailer hand
brake to straighten out a jackknifing
trailer?
4. What is offtracking?
5. When you back a trailer, you should
position your vehicle so you can back in
a curved path to the driver's side. True or
False?
6. What type of trailers can get stuck on
railroad-highway crossings?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsection 6.1.
6.2 Combination
vehicle air brakes
You should study Section 5: Air Brakes
before reading this section. In combination
vehicles, the braking system has parts to
control the trailer brakes, in addition to the
parts described in Section 5. These parts are
described below.
6.2.1 Trailer hand valve
The trailer hand valve (also called the
trolley valve or Johnson bar) works the
trailer brakes. The trailer hand valve should
be used only to test the trailer brakes. Do
not use it while driving because of the
danger of making the trailer skid. The foot
brake sends air to all of the brakes on the
vehicle­including the trailer(s). There
is much less danger of causing a skid or
jackknife when using just the foot brake.
COVER 124 CONTENTS
Never use the hand valve for parking
because all the air might leak out, unlocking
the brakes (in trailers that don't have spring
brakes). Always use the parking brakes
when parking. If the trailer does not have
spring brakes, use wheel chocks to keep the
trailer from moving.
6.2.2 Tractor protection valve
The tractor protection valve keeps air in the
tractor or truck brake system should the
trailer break away or develop a bad leak. The
tractor protection valve is controlled by the
"trailer air supply" control valve in the cab.
The control valve allows you to open and
shut the tractor protection valve. The tractor
protection valve will close automatically
if air pressure is low (in the range of 20 to
45 psi). When the tractor protection valve
closes, it stops any air from going out of the
tractor. It also lets the air out of the trailer
emergency line. This causes the trailer
emergency brakes to come on, with possible
loss of control. (Emergency brakes are
covered later.)
6.2.3 Trailer air supply control
The trailer air supply control on newer
vehicles is a red eight-sided knob that you
use to control the tractor protection valve.
You push it in to supply the trailer with
air and pull it out to shut the air off and
put on the trailer emergency brakes. The
valve will pop out (thus closing the tractor
protection valve) when the air pressure
drops into the range of 20 to 45 psi. Tractor
protection valve controls or "emergency"
valves on older vehicles, may not operate
automatically. There may be a lever rather
than a knob. The "normal" position is
used for pulling a trailer. The "emergency"
position is used to shut the air off and put
on the trailer emergency brakes.
6.2.4 Trailer air lines
Every combination vehicle has two air lines,
the service line and the emergency line.
They run between each vehicle (tractor
to trailer, trailer to dolly, dolly to second
trailer, etc.).
Service air line
The service line (also called the control line
or signal line) carries air which is controlled
by the foot brake or the trailer hand brake.
Depending on how hard you press the
foot brake or hand valve, the pressure in
the service line will similarly change. The
service line is connected to relay valves.
These valves allow the trailer brakes to be
applied more quickly than would otherwise
be possible.
Emergency air line
The emergency line (also called the supply
line) has two purposes. First, it supplies
air to the trailer air tanks. Second, the
emergency line controls the emergency
brakes on combination vehicles. Loss of air
pressure in the emergency line causes the
trailer emergency brakes to come on. The
pressure loss could be caused by a trailer
breaking loose, tearing apart the emergency
air hose. Or it could be caused by a hose,
metal tubing or other part that breaks,
letting the air out. When the emergency
line loses pressure, it also causes the tractor
protection valve to close (the air supply knob
will pop out).
Emergency lines are often coded with the
color red (red hose, red couplers or other
parts) to keep from getting them mixed up
with the blue service line.
COVER 125 CONTENTS
6.2.5 Hose couplers
(glad hands)
Glad hands are coupling devices used to
connect the service and emergency air lines
from the truck or tractor to the trailer. The
couplers have a rubber seal which prevents
air from escaping. Clean the couplers and
rubber seals before a connection is made.
When connecting the glad hands, press the
two seals together with the couplers at a 90
degree angle to each other. A turn of the
glad hand attached to the hose will join and
lock the couplers.
When coupling, make sure to couple the
proper glad hands together. To help avoid
mistakes, colors are sometimes used. Blue
is used for the service lines and red for the
emergency (supply) lines. Sometimes, metal
tags are attached to the lines with the words
"service" and "emergency" stamped on them.
If you do cross the air lines, supply air will
be sent to the service line instead of going to
charge the trailer air tanks. Air will not be
available to release the trailer spring brakes
(parking brakes). If the spring brakes don't
release when you push the trailer air supply
control, check the air line connections.
Older trailers do not have spring brakes.
If the air supply in the trailer air tank has
leaked away, there will be no emergency
brakes and the trailer wheels will turn
freely. If you crossed the air lines, you could
drive away but you wouldn't have trailer
brakes. This would be very dangerous.
Always test the trailer brakes before driving
with the hand valve or by pulling the air
supply (tractor protection valve) control.
Pull gently against them in a low gear to
make sure the brakes work.
Some vehicles have "dead end" or dummy
couplers to which the hoses may be attached
when they are not in use. This will prevent
water and dirt from getting into the coupler
and the air lines. Use the dummy couplers
when the air lines are not connected to a
trailer. If there are no dummy couplers,
the glad hands can sometimes be locked
together (depending on the couplings). It is
very important to keep the air supply clean.
6.2.6 Trailer air tanks
Each trailer and converter dolly has one
or more air tanks. They are filled by the
emergency (supply) line from the tractor.
They provide the air pressure used to operate
trailer brakes. Air pressure is sent from the
air tanks to the brakes by relay valves.
The pressure in the service line tells how
much pressure the relay valves should send
to the trailer brakes. The pressure in the
service line is controlled by the brake pedal
and the trailer hand brake.
It is important that you don't let water and
oil build up in the air tanks. If you do, the
brakes may not work correctly. Each tank
has a drain valve on it and you should
drain each tank every day. If your tanks
have automatic drains, they will keep most
moisture out. But you should still open the
drains to make sure.
COVER 126 CONTENTS
6.2.7 Shut-off valves
Shut-off valves (also called cut-out cocks)
are used in the service and supply air lines
at the back of trailers used to tow other
trailers. These valves permit closing the air
lines off when another trailer is not being
towed. You must check that all shut-off
valves are in the open position except the
ones at the back of the last trailer, which
must be closed.
6.2.8 Trailer service, parking
and emergency brakes
Newer trailers have spring brakes just
like trucks and truck tractors. However,
converter dollies and trailers built before
1975 are not required to have spring brakes.
Those that do not have spring brakes have
emergency brakes which work from the air
stored in the trailer air tank. The emergency
brakes come on whenever air pressure in the
emergency line is lost. These trailers have
no parking brake. The emergency brakes
come on whenever the air supply knob is
pulled out or the trailer is disconnected. A
major leak in the emergency line will cause
the tractor protection valve to close and the
trailer emergency brakes to come on. But the
brakes will hold only as long as there is air
pressure in the trailer air tank. Eventually,
the air will leak away and there will be no
brakes. Therefore, it is very important for
safety that you use wheel chocks when you
park trailers without spring brakes.
You may not notice a major leak in the
service line until you try to put the brakes
on. Then, the air loss from the leak will
lower the air tank pressure quickly. If it goes
low enough, the trailer emergency brakes
will come on.
Test your knowledge
1. Why should you not use the trailer hand
valve while driving?
2. Describe what the trailer air supply
control does.
3. Describe what the service line is for.
4. What is the emergency air line for?
5. Why should you use chocks when
parking a trailer without spring brakes?
6. Where are shut-off valves?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsection 6.2.
6.3 Antilock brake systems
6.3.1 Trailers required
to have ABS
All trailers and converter dollies built on or
after March 1, 1998, are required to have
ABS. However, many trailers and converter
dollies built before this date have been
voluntarily equipped with ABS.
Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction
lamps on the left side, either on the front
or rear corner. Dollies manufactured on or
after March 1, 1998, are required to have a
lamp on the left side.
In the case of vehicles manufactured before
the required date, it may be difficult to
tell if the unit is equipped with ABS. Look
under the vehicle for the ECU and wheel
speed sensor wires coming from the back
of the brakes.
COVER 127 CONTENTS
6.3.2 Braking with ABS
ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It
does not decrease or increase your normal
braking capability. ABS only activates when
wheels are about to lock up.
ABS does not necessarily shorten your
stopping distance, but it does help you
keep the vehicle under control during hard
braking.
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up. The
computer senses impending lockup, reduces
the braking pressure to a safe level, and
helps you maintain control.
Having ABS on only the trailer, or even on
only one axle, still gives you more control
over the vehicle during braking.
When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer
is less likely to swing out, but if you lose
steering control or start a tractor jackknife,
let up on the brakes (if you can safely do so)
until you gain control.
When you drive a tractor-trailer
combination with ABS, you should brake as
you always have. In other words:
· Use only the braking force necessary to
stop safely and stay in control.
· Brake the same way, regardless of
whether you have ABS on the tractor, the
trailer, or both.
· As you slow down, monitor your tractor
and trailer and back off the brakes (if it
is safe to do so) to stay in control.
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you
still have regular brakes. Drive normally,
but get the system serviced soon.
ABS won't allow you to drive faster, follow
more closely, or drive less carefully.
6.4 Coupling and uncoupling
Knowing how to couple and uncouple
correctly is basic to safe operation of
combination vehicles. Incorrect coupling
and uncoupling can be very dangerous.
General coupling and uncoupling steps
are listed below. There are differences
between different rigs, so learn the details
of coupling and uncoupling the truck(s) you
will operate.
6.4.1 Coupling tractor-
semitrailers
Step 1. Inspect the fifth wheel
· Check for damaged/missing parts.
· Check to see that the mounting to the
tractor is secure (no cracks in frame, etc.).
· Be sure the fifth wheel plate is greased as
required, or if using a Teflon plate, the
Teflon plate is present, secure and not
damaged. Failure to keep the fifth wheel
plate lubricated could cause steering
problems because of friction between the
tractor and trailer.
· Check if the fifth wheel is in the proper
position for coupling.
 Wheel tilted down toward rear of
tractor.
 Jaws open.
 Safety unlocking handle in the
automatic lock position.
· If you have a sliding fifth wheel, make
sure it is locked.
· Make sure the trailer kingpin and apron
are not bent, cracked or broken.
COVER 128 CONTENTS
Step 2. Inspect area and chock wheels
· Make sure the area around the vehicle is
clear.
· Be sure trailer wheels are chocked or
spring brakes are on.
· Check that cargo (if any) is secured
against movement due to the tractor
being coupled to the trailer.
Step 3. Position the tractor
· Put the tractor directly in front of the
trailer. Never back under the trailer at an
angle because you might push the trailer
sideways and break the landing gear.
· Check position, using outside mirrors, by
looking down both sides of the trailer.
Step 4. Back slowly
· Back until the fifth wheel just touches the
trailer.
· Don't hit the trailer.
Step 5. Secure the tractor
· Put on the parking brake.
· Put transmission in neutral.
Step 6. Check trailer height
· The trailer should be low enough that it
is raised slightly by the tractor when the
tractor is backed under it. Raise or lower
the trailer as needed. (If the trailer is too
low, the tractor may strike and damage
the nose of the trailer. If the trailer is too
high, it may not couple correctly.)
· Check that the kingpin and fifth wheel
are aligned.
Step 7. Connect the air lines to the
trailer
· Check the glad hand seals and connect
the tractor emergency air line to the
trailer emergency glad hand.
· Check the glad hand seals and connect
the tractor service air line to the trailer
service glad hand.
· Make sure the air lines are safely
supported where they won't be crushed
or caught while the tractor is backing
under the trailer.
Step 8. Supply air to the trailer
· From the cab, push in the "air supply"
knob or move the tractor protection
valve control from the "emergency" to
the "normal" position to supply air to the
trailer brake system.
· Wait until the air pressure is normal.
· Check the brake system for crossed air
lines.
 Shut the engine off so you can hear
the brakes.
 Apply and release the trailer brakes
and listen for the sound of the trailer
brakes being applied and released.
You should hear the brakes move
when they are applied and air escape
when the brakes are released.
 Check the air brake system pressure
gauge for signs of major air loss.
· When you are sure the trailer brakes are
working, start the engine.
· Make sure air pressure is up to normal.
COVER 129 CONTENTS
Step 9. Lock the trailer brakes
· Pull out the "air supply" knob or move
the tractor protection valve control from
"normal" to "emergency."
Step 10. Back under the trailer
· Use the lowest reverse gear.
· Back the tractor slowly under the trailer
to avoid hitting the kingpin too hard.
· Stop when the kingpin is locked into the
fifth wheel.
Step 11. Check the connection for
security
· Raise the trailer landing gear slightly
off the ground.
· Pull the tractor gently forward while
the trailer brakes are still locked to check
that the trailer is locked onto the tractor.
Step 12. Secure the vehicle
· Put the transmission in neutral.
· Put the parking brakes on.
· Shut off the engine and take the key
with you so someone else won't move the
truck while you are under it.
Step 13. Inspect the coupling
· Use a flashlight, if necessary.
· Make sure there is no space between the
upper and lower fifth wheel. If there is
space, something is wrong (the kingpin
may be on top of the closed fifth wheel
jaws; the trailer would come loose very
easily).
· Go under the trailer and look into the
back of the fifth wheel. Make sure the
fifth wheel jaws have closed around the
shank of the kingpin. See Figure 6-7.
Figure 6-7: Trailer Kingpin
Kingpin
· Check that the locking lever is in the
"lock" position.
· Check that the safety latch is in position
over the locking lever. (On some fifth
wheels the catch must be put in place by
hand.).
· If the coupling isn't right, don't drive
the coupled unit; get it fixed.
Step 14. Connect the electrical cord
and check the air lines
· Plug the electrical cord into the trailer
and fasten the safety catch.
· Check both the air lines and the electrical
line for signs of damage.
· Make sure the air and electrical lines
will not hit any moving parts of the
vehicle.
Step 15. Raise the front trailer
supports (landing gear)
· Use low gear range (if so equipped) to
begin raising the landing gear. Once free
of weight, switch to the high gear range.
· Raise the landing gear all the way up.
Never drive with the landing gear only
part way up as it may catch on railroad
tracks or other things.
COVER 130 CONTENTS
· After raising the landing gear, secure the
crank handle safely.
· When the full weight of the trailer is
resting on the tractor:
 Check for enough clearance between
the rear of the tractor frame and
the landing gear. (When the tractor
turns sharply, it must not hit the
landing gear.)
 Check that there is enough clearance
between the top of the tractor tires
and the nose of the trailer.
Step 16. Remove trailer wheel chocks
· Remove and store the wheel chocks in a
safe place.
6.4.2 Uncoupling tractor-
semitrailers
The following steps will help you to
uncouple safely:
Step 1. Position the rig
· Make sure the surface of the parking area
can support the weight of the trailer.
· Have the tractor lined up with the trailer.
Pulling out at an angle can damage the
landing gear.
Step 2. Ease pressure on the locking
jaws
· Shut off the trailer air supply to lock the
trailer brakes.
· Ease the pressure on the fifth wheel
locking jaws by backing up gently. This
will help you release the fifth wheel
locking lever.
· Put the parking brakes on while the
tractor is pushing against the kingpin.
This will hold the rig with pressure off
the locking jaws.
Step 3. Chock the trailer wheels
· Chock the trailer wheels if the trailer
doesn't have spring brakes or if you're not
sure. The air could leak out of the trailer
air tank, releasing its emergency brakes.
Without chocks, the trailer could move.
Step 4. Lower the landing gear
· If the trailer is empty, lower the landing
gear until it makes firm contact with the
ground.
· If the trailer is loaded, after the landing
gear makes firm contact with the
ground, turn the crank in low gear a few
extra turns. This will lift some weight off
the tractor. (Do not lift the trailer off the
fifth wheel.) This will:
 make it easier to unlatch the fifth
wheel;.
 make it easier to couple the next
time.
Step 5. Disconnect the air lines and
electrical cable
· Disconnect the air lines from the trailer.
Connect the air line glad hands to the
dummy couplers at the back of the cab or
couple them together.
· Hang the electrical cable with the
plug down to prevent moisture from
entering it.
· Make sure the lines are supported so
they won't be damaged while driving
the tractor.
Step 6. Unlock the fifth wheel
· Raise the release handle lock.
· Pull the release handle to the "open"
position.
· Keep your legs and feet clear of the rear
tractor wheels to avoid serious injury in
case the vehicle moves.
COVER 131 CONTENTS
Step 7. Pull the tractor partially clear
of the trailer
· Pull the tractor forward until the fifth
wheel comes out from under the trailer.
· Stop with the tractor frame under the
trailer. This prevents the trailer from
falling to the ground if the landing gear
should collapse or sink.
Step 8. Secure the tractor
· Apply the parking brake.
· Place the transmission in neutral.
Step 9. Inspect the trailer supports
· Make sure the ground is supporting the
trailer.
· Make sure the landing gear is not
damaged.
Step 10. Pull the tractor clear of the
trailer
· Release the parking brakes.
· Check the area and drive the tractor
forward until it clears.
Test your knowledge
1. What might happen if the trailer is too
high when you try to couple?
2. After coupling, how much space should be
between the upper and lower fifth wheel?
3. True or False? You should look into
the back of the fifth wheel to see if it is
locked onto the kingpin.
4. True or False? To drive, you need to raise
the landing gear only until it just lifts off
the pavement.
5. How do you know if your trailer is
equipped with antilock brakes?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 6.3 and 6.4.
6.4.3 Coupling a pintle hook
Step 1. Inspect pintle hook
· Before operating, check for worn,
damaged, or missing parts, and make
sure mount is secure.
· If the pintle hook is not secured to the
mounting surface, the pintle hook could
separate from the vehicle which, if not
avoided, could result in death or serious
injury.
Step 2. Unlock lock pin and open latch
· Unlock and remove the tethered lock
pin, if applicable (Figure 16).
Figure 16
· Lift the lock handle away from the
vehicle until the lock clears the lock seat
on the hook body.
COVER 132 CONTENTS
· Open the latch by rotating the latch
assembly up toward the vehicle until the
latch is in its most upright position, then
release the lock handle (Figure 17 and 18).
Figure 17
Figure 18
Step 3. Lower drawbar into place
· Position the drawbar eye over the horn
of the pintle hook and lower it into place.
Step 4. Lock pintle hook
· Push the latch closed. When correctly
locked, the lock handle will rotate and
move up until it is flush with the top of
the latch (Figure 19).
Figure 19
· Insert the tethered lock pin through
the latch and lock holes, and close the
tethered wire lock pin, if applicable
(Figure 16).
· Failure to correctly lock the latch can
result in separation of the trailer and
vehicle which, if not avoided, could result
in death or serious injury.
6.4.4 Uncoupling a pintle hook
Step 1. Park on level surface
· Park the trailer on a firm level surface
and block trailer tires.
Step 2. Disconnect electrical
connector, breakaway brake switch
and safety chains
· Disconnect electrical connector.
· Disconnect breakaway brake switch
lanyard.
· Disconnect safety chains from tow
vehicle.
Step 3. Unlock the coupler
· Unlock the coupler and open it.
Step 4. Check ground surface for
correct support
· Before extending jack, make certain the
ground surface below the jack pad will
support the tongue load.
COVER 133 CONTENTS
Step 5. Rotate jack handle
· Rotate jack handle to extend the jack and
transfer the weight of the trailer tongue
to the jack.
Step 6. Raise trailer coupler
· Raise the trailer coupler above the tow
vehicle hitch.
Step 7. Drive forward
· Drive tow vehicle forward.
6.4.5 Coupling a drawbar
Step 1. Remove safety lock screw and
rotate safety cover bar
· Remove safety lock screw (2), recover
and keep the relative self-locking nut (12)
aside then also loosen safety lock screw
(2a) and turn out the adjustment screw
(3) by at least five turns.
· Rotate the safety cover bar (4) outwards
so that it is completely open.
Step 2. Reverse truck
· Reverse truck very slowly until the ball
cup drawbar eye (6) is in position exactly
above the drawbar coupling ball (5).
Step 3. Lower the drawbeam
· Lower the drawbeam until the ball cup
drawbar eye (6) lies completely covering
the drawbar coupling ball (5).
Step 4. Rotate the safety cover bar
· Rotate the safety cover bar back inwards
(4) and fit in safety lock screw (2)
together with its self-locking nut.
· Tighten in both the lock screws (2, 2a)
together with their relative self-locking
nuts (12, 12a) at a 350 to 400 Nm torque
wrench setting.
Step 5. Adjust the adjustment screw
· Adjust the adjustment screw (3) until a
0.3­0.5 mm vertical clearance between
the guard disk (13) and the ball cup (6)
is reached. Lock setting with counter
nut (11).
· In the event that the safety cover bar (4)
will not perfectly lodge into its seating
appropriately, travel is strictly forbidden.
COVER 134 CONTENTS
Step 6. Protect coupling ball and
anchor edge onto ball
· Protect the part that is still visible of
the coupling ball (5) with the rubber
dust proof bellows protection cover (7).
Accurately anchor the edge directly onto
the ball itself.
Step 7. Lubricate the drawbar eye
· Lubricate the inside of the drawbar eye
ball cup (6) directly through the grease
nipple (18).
6.4.6 Uncoupling a drawbar
Step 1. Turn trailer brake on
· Make sure that the trailer brake is on.
Step 2. Remove cover and loosen
screws
· Remove the rubber dust proof bellows
protection cover (7).
· Loosen the adjustment screw (3) and the
counter nut (11).
· Loosen safety lock screw (2a) and
remove safety lock screw (2) together
with its self-locking nut (12).
Step 3. Rotate safety cover bar and lift
trailer drawbeam
· Rotate the safety cover bar (4) outwards
so that it is completely open.
· Lift the trailer drawbeam until the
drawbar coupling ball (5) is fully visible,
then travel forward with the trailer very
slowly.
· Rotate the safety cover bar inwards (4)
until it lodges back in its housing.
Step 4. Lock safety screw and tighten
self-Llocking nut
· Fit in safety lock screw (2) and tighten in
self-locking nut (12).
6.4.7 Coupling a
gooseneck hitch
If you are hooking up a Gooseneck or a
fifth wheel hitch, the procedure is a little
different from a receiver and ball, but it is
not more difficult.
Step 1. Open the latch and lubricate
the gooseneck ball
· Open the clamp latch on the Gooseneck
coupler.
· Make sure that the Gooseneck ball is
properly lubricated.
Step 2. Position coupler and latch the
clamp
· Position the trailer's coupler directly over
the ball and lower the Gooseneck trailer
into position and latch the clamp.
Step 3. Attach safety chains
· Attach your safety chains. Remember
that all trailers are required by law to
have safety chains.
Step 4. Connect trailer light wiring
· Connect your trailer light wiring to your
vehicle's connector.
· Check all of your lights, including your
brake lights.
COVER 135 CONTENTS
Step 5. Lower and stow the trailer
jacks
· Completely lower and stow the trailer
jacks, allowing the weight to settle onto
the tow vehicle.
6.4.8 Uncoupling a
gooseneck hitch
Step 1. Remove safety pin and clip
· Simply remove safety pin and clip.
Step 2. Rotate handle and raise trailer
off ball
· Rotate handle to this position (Figure
B) and raise trailer off ball. Coupler will
return to load position automatically.
Step 3. Install safety pin and clip
· Install safety pin and clip. (Figure B)
Figure B
6.5 Inspecting a
combination vehicle
Use the seven-step inspection procedure
described in Section 2 to inspect your
combination vehicle. There are more things
to inspect on a combination vehicle than on
a single vehicle. For example, tires, wheels,
lights, reflectors, etc. However, there are
also some new things to check. These are
discussed below.
6.5.1 Additional things to check
during a walkaround inspection
Do these checks in addition to those listed
in Section 2, "Step 5: Do Walkaround
Inspection."
Coupling system areas
· Fifth wheel (lower).
 Securely mounted to the frame.
 No missing or damaged parts.
 Enough grease.
 No visible space between the upper
and lower fifth wheel.
 Locking jaws are around the shank,
not the head of the kingpin. See
Figure 6-7.
 Release arm is properly seated and
the safety latch/lock engaged.
· Fifth wheel (upper).
 Guide plate is securely mounted to
the trailer frame; not bent, cracked or
broken.
 Kingpin is not damaged.
COVER 136 CONTENTS
· Air and electric lines to the trailer.
 Electrical cord is firmly plugged in
and secured.
 Air lines are properly connected to
the glad hands, no air leaks, properly
secured with enough slack for turns.
 All lines are free from damage.
· Sliding fifth wheel.
 Slide is not damaged; has no parts
missing.
 Properly greased.
 All locking pins are present and
locked in place.
 If air powered­there are no air
leaks.
 Check that the fifth wheel is not so
far forward the tractor frame will hit
the landing gear, or the cab will hit
the trailer, during turns.
Landing gear
· Fully raised, no missing parts, not bent
or otherwise damaged.
· Crank handle is in place and secured.
· If power operated, there are no air or
hydraulic leaks.
6.5.2 Combination
vehicle brake check
Do these checks in addition to Section 5.3,
Inspecting Air Brake Systems.
The following section explains how to check
air brakes on combination vehicles. Check
the brakes on a double or triple trailer as
you would any combination vehicle.
Check that air flows to all trailers
Use the tractor parking brake and/or chock
the wheels to hold the vehicle. Wait for the
air pressure to reach normal, then push in
the red "trailer air supply" knob. This will
supply air to the emergency (supply) lines.
Use the trailer handbrake to provide air to
the service line. Go to the rear of the rig.
Open the emergency line shut-off valve at
the rear of the last trailer. You should hear
air escaping, showing the entire system is
charged. Close the emergency line valve.
Open the service line valve to check that
service pressure goes through all the trailers
(this test assumes the trailer handbrake or
the service brake pedal is on), then close the
valve. If you do NOT hear air escaping from
both lines, check that the shut-off valves on
the trailer(s) and dolly(s) are in the OPEN
position. You MUST have air all the way to
the back for all the brakes to work.
Test the tractor protection valve
Charge the trailer air brake system. (That
is, build up normal air pressure and push
the "air supply" knob in). Shut the engine
off. Step on and off the brake pedal several
times to reduce the air pressure in the
tanks. The trailer air supply control (also
called the tractor protection valve control)
should pop out (or go from "normal" to
"emergency" position) when the air pressure
COVER 137 CONTENTS
falls into the pressure range specified by the
manufacturer, usually within the range of
20 to 45 psi.
If the tractor protection valve doesn't work
right, an air hose or trailer brake leak could
drain all the air from the tractor. This would
cause the emergency brakes to come on,
with possible loss of control.
Test the trailer emergency brakes
Charge the trailer air brake system and
check that the trailer rolls freely. Then stop
and pull out the trailer air supply control
(also called the tractor protection valve
control or trailer emergency valve) or place
it in the "emergency" position. Pull gently on
the trailer with the tractor to check that the
trailer emergency brakes are on.
Test the trailer service brakes
Check for normal air pressure, release the
parking brakes, move the vehicle forward
slowly and apply the trailer brakes with the
hand control (trolley valve), if so equipped.
You should feel the brakes come on. This
tells you the trailer brakes are connected
and working. (The trailer brakes should be
tested with the hand valve, but controlled
in normal operation with the foot pedal,
which applies air to the service brakes at
all wheels.).
NOTE: Straight truck, passenger bus and
combination vehicle inspection memory aids
are located in Section 11M.
Test your knowledge
1. Which shut-off valves should be open
and which should be closed?
2. How can you test that air flows to all
trailers?
3. How can you test the tractor protection
valve?
4. How can you test the trailer emergency
brakes?
5. How can you test the trailer service
brakes?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsection 6.5.
COVER 138 CONTENTS
SECTION 7: DOUBLES AND
TRIPLES
This section covers:
· Pulling Double/Triple Trailers
· Coupling and Uncoupling
· Inspecting Doubles and Triples
· Doubles/Triples Air Brake Check
This section has information you need to
pass the CDL knowledge test for driving
safely with double and triple trailers. It
tells about how important it is to be very
careful when driving with more than one
trailer, how to couple and uncouple correctly
and about inspecting doubles and triples
carefully. (You should also study Section 2,
Section 5 and Section 6.)
7.1 Pulling double/
triple trailers
Take special care when pulling two and
three trailers. There are more things that
can go wrong and doubles/triples are less
stable than other commercial vehicles. Some
areas of concern are discussed below.
7.1.1 Prevent trailers
from rolling over
To prevent trailers from rolling over, you
must steer gently and go slowly around
corners, on-ramps, off-ramps and curves. A
safe speed on a curve for a straight truck or
a single trailer combination vehicle may be
too fast for double or triple trailers.
7.1.2 Beware of the crack-
the-whip effect
Doubles and triples are more likely to
turn over than other combination vehicles
because of the "crack-the-whip" effect. You
must steer gently when pulling trailers.
The last trailer in a combination is most
likely to turn over. If you don't understand
the crack-the-whip effect, study Section 6.1
and review Figure 6-1 in the Combination
Vehicles section of this manual.
7.1.3 Inspect completely
There are more critical parts to check when
you have two or three trailers. Check them
all. Follow the procedures described later in
this section.
7.1.4 Look far ahead
Doubles and triples must be driven very
smoothly to avoid rollover or jackknife.
Therefore, look far ahead so you can
slow down or change lanes gradually
when necessary.
7.1.5 Manage space
Doubles and triples take up more space than
other commercial vehicles. They are not only
longer, but also need more space because
they can't be turned or stopped suddenly.
Allow more following distance. Make sure
you have large enough gaps before entering
or crossing traffic. Before changing lanes, be
certain the lane is open, signal, check traffic
and avoid sudden turning movements.
7.1.6 Adverse conditions
Be more careful in adverse conditions.
In bad weather, slippery conditions and
mountain driving, you must be especially
careful if you drive double and triple
bottoms. You will have greater length and
more dead axles to pull with your drive
axles than other vehicles. There is more
chance for skids and loss of traction.
COVER 139 CONTENTS
7.1.7 Parking the vehicle
Make sure you do not get in a spot you
cannot pull straight through. You need to be
aware of how parking lots are arranged in
order to avoid a long and difficult escape.
7.1.8 Antilock braking systems
on converter dollies
Converter dollies built on or after March 1,
1998, are required to have antilock brakes.
These dollies will have a yellow lamp on the
left side of the dolly.
7.2 Coupling and uncoupling
Knowing how to couple and uncouple
correctly is basic to safe operation of
doubles and triples. Incorrect coupling and
uncoupling can be very dangerous. Coupling
and uncoupling steps for doubles and triples
are listed below.
7.2.1 Coupling twin trailers
Secure the second (rear) trailer
If the second trailer doesn't have spring
brakes, drive the tractor close to the
trailer, connect the emergency line, charge
the trailer air tank and disconnect the
emergency line. This will set the trailer
emergency brakes (if the slack adjusters are
correctly adjusted). Chock the wheels if you
have any doubt about the brakes.
CAUTION: For the safest handling on
the road, the more heavily loaded semi-
trailer should be in the first position
behind the tractor. The lighter trailer
should be in the rear.
A converter gear or dolly is a coupling device
of one or two axles and a fifth wheel by
which a semi-trailer can be coupled to the
rear of a tractor-trailer combination forming
a double bottom rig.
Position the converter dolly in front
of the second (rear) trailer
· Release the dolly brakes by opening the
air tank petcock. (Or, if the dolly has
spring brakes, use the dolly parking
brake control.).
· If the distance is not too great, wheel the
dolly into position by hand so it is in line
with the kingpin.
· Or, use the tractor and first semi-trailer
to pick up the converter dolly:
 Position the combination as close as
possible to the converter dolly.
 Move the dolly to the rear of the
first semi-trailer and couple it to the
trailer.
 Lock the pintle hook.
 Secure the dolly support in the raised
position.
 Pull the dolly into position as close
as possible to the nose of the second
semi-trailer.
 Lower the dolly support.
 Unhook the dolly from the first
trailer.
· Wheel the dolly into position in front
of the second trailer in line with the
kingpin.
Connect the converter dolly to the
front trailer
· Back the first semi-trailer into position in
front of the dolly tongue.
· Hook the dolly to the front trailer.
· Lock the pintle hook.
· Secure the converter gear support in the
raised position.
COVER 140 CONTENTS
Connect the converter dolly to the
rear trailer
· Make sure the trailer brakes are locked
and/or the wheels are chocked.
· Make sure the trailer height is correct.
It must be slightly lower than the center
of the fifth wheel, so the trailer is raised
slightly when the dolly is pushed under.
· Back the converter dolly under the rear
trailer.
· Raise the landing gear slightly off the
ground to prevent damage if the trailer
moves.
· Test the coupling by pulling against the
pin of the second semi-trailer.
· Make a visual check of the coupling.
There should be no space between the
upper and lower fifth wheel. The locking
jaws should be closed on the kingpin.
· Connect the safety chains, air hoses and
light cords.
· Close the converter dolly air tank
petcock.
· Close the shut-off valves at the rear of the
second trailer (service and emergency
shut-offs).
· Open the shut-off valves at the rear of
the first trailer (and on the dolly, if so
equipped).
· Raise the landing gear completely.
· Charge the trailers (push the "air supply"
knob in) and check for air at the rear
of the second trailer by opening the
emergency line shut-off. If air pressure
isn't there, something is wrong and the
brakes won't work.
7.2.2 Uncoupling twin trailers
Uncouple the rear trailer
· Park the rig in a straight line on firm
level ground.
· Apply the parking brakes so the rig won't
move.
· Chock the wheels of the second trailer if
it doesn't have spring brakes.
· Lower the landing gear of the second
semi-trailer enough to remove some
weight from the dolly.
· Close the air shut-offs at the rear of the
first semi-trailer (and on the dolly, if so
equipped).
· Disconnect all the dolly air and electric
lines and secure them.
· Release the dolly brakes.
· Release the converter dolly fifth wheel
latch.
· Slowly pull the tractor, first semi-trailer
and dolly forward to pull the dolly out
from under the rear semi-trailer.
Uncouple the converter dolly
· Lower the dolly landing gear.
· Disconnect the safety chains.
· Apply the converter gear spring brakes or
chock the wheels.
· Release the pintle hook on the first semi-
trailer.
· Slowly pull clear of the dolly.
CAUTION: Never unlock the pintle hook
with the dolly still under the rear trailer.
The dolly tow bar may fly up, possibly
causing injury and making it very difficult
to re-couple.
COVER 141 CONTENTS
7.2.3 Coupling and
uncoupling triple trailers
Couple the tractor/first semi-trailer
to the second/third trailers
· Couple the tractor to the first trailer.
Use the method already described for
coupling tractor-semitrailers.
· Move the converter dolly into position
and couple the first trailer to the second
trailer using the method for coupling
doubles. The triples rig is now complete.
Uncouple the triple-trailer rig
· Uncouple the third trailer by pulling the
dolly out, then unhitching the dolly using
the method for uncoupling doubles.
· Uncouple the remainder of the rig as you
would any double-bottom rig using the
method already described.
7.2.4 Coupling and uncoupling
other combinations
The methods described so far apply to the
more common tractor-trailer combinations.
However, there are other ways of coupling
and uncoupling the many types of truck-
trailer and tractor-trailer combinations
that are in use. There are too many to
cover in this manual. You need to learn
the correct way to couple and uncouple the
vehicle(s) you will drive according to the
manufacturer and/or owner specifications.
7.3 Inspecting doubles
and triples
Use the seven-step inspection procedure
described in Section 2 to inspect your
combination vehicle. There are more things
to inspect on a combination vehicle than
on a single vehicle. Many of these items are
simply more of what you would find on a
single vehicle. (For example, tires, wheels,
lights, reflectors, etc.) However, there are
also some new things to check. These are
discussed below.
7.3.1 Additional checks
Complete these checks in addition to those
already listed in Section 2, Step 5: Do
Walkaround Inspection.
Coupling system areas
· Fifth wheel (lower).
 Securely mounted to the frame.
 No missing or damaged parts.
 Enough grease.
 No visible space between the upper
and lower fifth wheel.
 Locking jaws are around the shank,
not the head of kingpin.
 Release arm is properly seated and
the safety latch/lock is engaged.
· Fifth wheel (upper).
 Glide plate is securely mounted to the
trailer frame, not bent, cracked or
broken.
 Kingpin is not damaged.
· Air and electric lines to the trailer.
 Electrical cord is firmly plugged in
and is secured.
 Air lines are properly connected to
the glad hands, no air leaks, properly
secured with enough slack for turns.
· All lines are free from damage.
· Sliding fifth wheel.
 Slide is not damaged; has no parts
missing.
 Properly greased.
COVER 142 CONTENTS
 All locking pins are present and are
locked in place.
 If air powered, there are no air leaks.
 Check that fifth wheel is not so far
forward the tractor frame will hit the
landing gear or the cab will hit the
trailer during turns.
Landing gear
· Fully raised, there are no missing parts,
it is not bent or otherwise damaged.
· Crank handle is in place and secured.
 If power operated, there are no air or
hydraulic leaks.
Double and triple trailers
· Shut-off valves (at the rear of trailers, in
the service and emergency lines):
 Rear of front trailers: OPEN.
 Rear of last trailer: CLOSED.
 Converter dolly air tank drain valve:
CLOSED.
· Be sure the air lines are supported and
the glad hands are properly connected.
· If the spare tire is carried on the
converter gear (dolly), make sure it is
secured.
· Be sure the pintle-eye of the dolly is in
place in the pintle hook of the trailer(s).
· Make sure the pintle hook is latched.
· Safety chains should be secured to the
trailer(s).
· Be sure light cords are firmly in the
sockets on trailers.
7.3.2 Additional things to check
during a walkaround inspection
Do these checks in addition to Section 5.3:
Inspecting Air Brake Systems
7.4 Doubles/triples
air brake check
Check the brakes on a double or triple trailer
as you would any combination vehicle.
Section 6.2 explains how to check air brakes
on combination vehicles. You must also
make the following checks on your double or
triple trailers:
7.4.1 Additional air brake checks
Check that air flows to all trailers
(double and triple trailers)
Use the tractor parking brake and/or chock
the wheels to hold the vehicle. Wait for air
pressure to reach normal, then push in
the red "trailer air supply" knob. This will
supply air to the emergency (supply) lines.
Use the trailer handbrake to provide air to
the service line. Go to the rear of the rig.
Open the emergency line shut-off valve at
the rear of the last trailer. You should hear
air escaping, showing the entire system is
charged. Close the emergency line valve.
Open the service line valve to check that
service pressure goes through all the trailers
(this test assumes that the trailer handbrake
or the service brake pedal is on), then close
the valve. If you do NOT hear air escaping
from both lines, check that the shut-off
valves on the trailer(s) and dolly(s) are in the
OPEN position. You MUST have air all the
way to the back for all the brakes to work.
Test the tractor protection valve
Charge the trailer air brake system. (That
is, build up normal air pressure and push
the "air supply" knob in.) Shut the engine
off. Step on and off the brake pedal several
times to reduce the air pressure in the
tanks. The trailer air supply control (also
called the tractor protection valve control)
COVER 143 CONTENTS
should pop out (or go from the "normal" to
"emergency" position) when the air pressure
falls into the pressure range specified by the
manufacturer, usually within the range of
20 to 45 psi.
If the tractor protection valve doesn't work
properly, an air hose or trailer brake leak
could drain all the air from the tractor. This
would cause the emergency brakes to come
on, with possible loss of control.
Test trailer emergency brakes
Charge the trailer air brake system and
check that the trailer rolls freely. Then stop
and pull out the trailer air supply control
(also called tractor protection valve control
or trailer emergency valve) or place it in the
"emergency" position. Pull gently on the
trailer with the tractor to check that the
trailer emergency brakes are on.
Test trailer service brakes
Check for normal air pressure, release the
parking brakes, move the vehicle forward
slowly and apply trailer brakes with the hand
control (trolley valve), if so equipped. You
should feel the brakes come on. This tells
you the trailer brakes are connected and
working. The trailer brakes should be tested
with the hand valve, but controlled in normal
operation with the foot pedal, which applies
air to the service brakes at all wheels.
Test your knowledge
1. What is a converter dolly?
2. Do converter dollies have spring brakes?
3. What three methods can you use to
secure a second trailer before coupling?
4. How do you check to make sure trailer
height is correct before coupling?
5. What do you check when making a visual
check of coupling?
6. Why should you pull a dolly out from
under a trailer before you disconnect it
from the trailer in front?
7. What should you check for when
inspecting the converter dolly? The pintle
hook?
8. Should the shut-off valves on the rear of
the last trailer be open or closed? On the
first trailer in a set of doubles? On the
middle trailer of a set of triples?
9. How can you test that air flows to all
trailers?
10.How do you know if your converter dolly
is equipped with antilock brakes?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
Subsection 7.
COVER 144 CONTENTS
SECTION 8: TANK VEHICLES
This section covers:
· Inspecting Tank Vehicles
· Driving Tank Vehicles
· Safe Driving Rules
This section has information needed to pass
the CDL knowledge test for driving a tank
vehicle. (You should also study Sections 2,
5, 6 and 9). A tank endorsement is required
for certain vehicles that transport liquids or
gases. The liquid or gas does not have to be a
hazardous material. A tank endorsement is
required if your vehicle needs a Class A or B
CDL and you want to haul a liquid or liquid
gas in a tank or tanks having an individual
rated capacity of more than 119 gallons
and an aggregate rated capacity of 1,000
gallons or more that is either permanently
or temporarily attached to the vehicle or
chassis. A tank endorsement is also required
for Class C vehicles when the vehicle is used
to transport hazardous materials in liquid or
gas form in the above described rated tanks.
Before loading, unloading or driving a
tanker, inspect the vehicle. This makes sure
that the vehicle is safe to carry the liquid or
gas and is safe to drive.
8.1 Inspecting tank vehicles
Tank vehicles have special items that you
need to check. Tank vehicles come in many
types and sizes. You need to check the
vehicle's operator manual to make sure you
know how to inspect your tank vehicle.
8.1.1 Leaks
On all tank vehicles, the most important
item to check for is leaks. Check under and
around the vehicle for signs of any leaking.
Do not carry liquids or gases in a leaking
tank. To do so is a crime. You will be cited
and prevented from driving further. You
may also be liable for the clean up of any
spill. In general, check the following:
· The tank's body or shell for dents or
leaks.
· The intake, discharge and cut-off valves.
Make sure the valves are in the correct
position before loading, unloading or
moving the vehicle.
· Pipes, connections and hoses for leaks,
especially around joints.
· Manhole covers and vents. Make sure
the covers have gaskets and they close
correctly. Keep the vents clear so they
work correctly.
8.1.2 Check special
purpose equipment
If your vehicle has any of the following
equipment, make sure it works:
· Vapor recovery kits.
· Grounding and bonding cables
· Emergency shut-off systems.
· Built in fire extinguisher.
Never drive a tank vehicle with open valves
or manhole covers.
8.1.3 Special equipment
Check the emergency equipment required
for your vehicle. Find out what equipment
you are required to carry, make sure you
have it and that it works.
8.2 Driving tank vehicles
Hauling liquids in tanks requires special
skills because of the high center of gravity
and liquid movement.
COVER 145 CONTENTS
8.2.1 High center of gravity
High center of gravity means that much
of the load's weight is carried high up off
the road. This makes the vehicle top-heavy
and easy to roll over. Liquid tankers are
especially easy to roll over. Tests have shown
that tankers can turn over at the speed
limits posted for curves. Take highway
curves and on-ramp/off-ramp curves well
below the posted speeds.
8.2.2 Danger of surge
Liquid surge results from movement of
the liquid in partially filled tanks. This
movement can have adverse effects on
handling. For example, when coming to a
stop, the liquid will surge back and forth.
When the wave hits the end of the tank, it
tends to push the truck in the direction the
wave is moving. If the truck is on a slippery
surface such as ice, the wave can shove
a stopped truck out into an intersection.
The driver of a liquid tanker must be very
familiar with the handling of the vehicle.
8.2.3 Bulkheads
Some liquid tanks are divided into several
smaller tanks by bulkheads. When loading
and unloading the smaller tanks, the driver
must pay attention to weight distribution.
Do not put too much weight on the front or
rear of the vehicle.
8.2.4 Baffled tanks
Baffled liquid tanks have bulkheads in them
with holes that let the liquid flow through.
The baffles help to control the forward and
backward liquid surge. However, side-to-
side surge can still occur. This can cause a
roll over.
8.2.5 Un-baffled tanks
Un-baffled liquid tankers (sometimes called
"smooth bore" tanks) have nothing inside to
slow down the flow of the liquid. Therefore,
forward-and-back surge is very strong. Un-
baffled tanks are usually those that transport
food products (milk, for example). Sanitation
regulations forbid the use of baffles because
of the difficulty in cleaning the inside of
the tank. Be extremely cautious (slow and
careful) in driving smooth bore tanks,
especially when starting and stopping.
Figure 8-1: Smooth bore tank
8.2.6 Outage
Never load a cargo tank totally full. Liquids
expand as they warm and you must leave
room for the expanding liquid. This is
called "outage" Since different liquids
expand by different amounts, they require
different amounts of outage. You must
know the outage requirement when hauling
liquids in bulk.
8.2.7 How much to load?
A full tank of dense liquid (such as some
acids) may exceed legal weight limits. For
that reason, you may often only partially
fill tanks with heavy liquids. The amount of
liquid to load into a tank depends on:
· The amount the liquid will expand in
transit.
· The weight of the liquid.
· Legal weight limits.
COVER 146 CONTENTS
8.3 Safe driving rules
In order to drive tank vehicles safely, you
must remember to follow all the safe driving
rules. A few of these rules are:
8.3.1 Drive smoothly
Because of the high center of gravity and
the surge of the liquid, you must start,
slow down, and stop very smoothly. Make
smooth turns and lane changes.
8.3.2 Controlling surge
Keep a steady pressure on the brakes. Do
not release too soon when coming to a stop.
Brake far in advance of a stop and increase
your following distance.
If you must make a quick stop to avoid a
crash, use controlled or stab braking. If
you do not remember how to stop using
these methods, review Section 2.17 Driving
Emergencies. Also, remember if you steer
quickly while braking, your vehicle may
roll over.
8.3.3 Curves
Slow down before curves, then accelerate
slightly through the curve. The posted speed
for a curve may be too fast for a tank vehicle.
Shifting cargo a problem with partial
loads
Tank drivers say that liquid cargo shifting
is a problem with "anything other than full
or empty." This condition occurs when the
driver makes sudden lane changes, takes
evasive action and on long downward curves.
A prime location for this condition to develop
is at freeway exit and entrance ramps.
Exit ramps especially dangerous
Here is an example of how an accident
can begin. A driver is making a right turn
off a freeway onto a 25-mph ramp from
the right lane and is watching the traffic
ahead and behind. He has the right turn
indicator on and gears down to around 40
mph as he enters the off-ramp traffic. He
brakes slightly and is already eyeing the
traffic stream he will be entering, which is
proceeding under the freeway. The ramp
traffic is slowing. He drops to a lower gear
and applies a little more braking. He feels
the right side of the rig start to "float." Then
he remembers he has two empty middle
compartments and two half-full ones, No.
1 and No. 4. If he steers left to correct, he
will jump the curb right into the underpass
traffic. If he brakes sharply and stays in the
ramp traffic, the leftward shifting of his
load could be accentuated and eventually
overturn the tank.
Figure 8-2: Shifting cargo
There is no textbook solution, only time and
whatever action the driver takes in hopes
the load shifting will be overcome by the
weight of the tractor and trailer as rig speed
is reduced.
COVER 147 CONTENTS
Be careful with partial loads
Even though full or empty runs occur much
more frequently than partial loads, there
is and will continue to be, need for partial
loads. The special handling requires full
awareness at all times of the changes in
vehicle characteristics that can only be
accomplished by lower speed, more careful
braking, load distribution and direction
changes.
Slow BEFORE turns
If you are already in the turn, it may be too
late to slow down safely. Therefore, the best
solution is to be especially watchful and
slow down before entering the turn.
8.3.4 Stopping distance
Keep in mind how much space you need to
stop your vehicle. Remember that wet roads
double the normal stopping distance. Empty
tank vehicles may take longer to stop than
full ones.
8.3.5 Skids
Do not over steer, over accelerate or over
brake. If you do, your vehicle may skid. On
tank trailers, if your drive wheels or trailer
wheels begin to skid, your vehicle may
jackknife. When any vehicle starts to skid,
you must take action to restore traction to
the wheels.
Test your knowledge
1. How are bulkheads different than
baffles?
2. Should a tank vehicle take curves, on-
ramps or off-ramps at the posted speed
limits?
3. How are smooth bore tankers different to
drive than those with baffles?
4. What three things determine how much
liquid you can load?
5. What is outage?
6. How can you help control surge?
7. What two reasons make special care
necessary when driving tank vehicles?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
Subsection 8.
COVER 148 CONTENTS
SECTION 9: HAZARDOUS
MATERIALS
This section covers:
· The Intent of the Regulations
· Who Does What, Including Driver
Responsibilities
· Communications Rules
· Loading and Unloading
· Bulk Packaging Marking, Loading and
Unloading
· Driving and Parking Rules
· Emergencies
· Glossary of Terms
Hazardous materials are products that pose
a risk to health, safety, and property during
transportation. The term often is shortened
to HAZMAT, which you may see on road
signs, or to HM in government regulations.
Hazardous materials include explosives,
various types of gas, solids, flammable and
combustible liquids, and other materials.
Because of the risks involved and the
potential consequences these risks impose,
the handling of hazardous materials is very
heavily regulated by all levels of government.
The Hazardous Materials Regulations
(HMR) are found in parts 171­180 of title
49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The
common reference for these regulations is
49 CFR 171­180.
The Hazardous Materials Table in the
regulations contains a list of hazardous
materials. However, the list is not all-
inclusive. Whether or not a material is
considered hazardous is based on its
characteristics and the shipper's decision
on whether or not the material meets the
definition of a hazardous material in the
regulations.
The regulations require vehicles
transporting certain types or quantities of
hazardous materials to display diamond-
shaped, square-on-point warning signs
called placards.
This section is designed to assist
you in understanding your role and
responsibilities in hauling hazardous
materials. Due to the constantly changing
nature of government regulations, it is
impossible to guarantee absolute accuracy
of the materials in this section. It is
essential for you to have an up-to-date copy
of the complete regulations. A complete
glossary of terms is included in them.
You must have a commercial driver
license (CDL) with a hazardous materials
endorsement before you drive any size vehicle
that is used to transport hazardous material
as defined in 49 CFR 383.5. You must pass
a knowledge test about the regulations and
requirements to get this endorsement.
Everything you need to know to pass the
knowledge test is in this section. However,
this is only a beginning. Most drivers need
to know much more on the job. You can
learn more by reading and understanding
the federal and state rules applicable to
hazardous materials as well as attending
hazardous materials training courses. Your
employer, colleges and universities, and
various associations usually offer these
courses. You can get copies of the Federal
Regulations (49 CFR) through your local
Government Printing Office bookstore
or various industry publishers. Union or
company offices often have copies of the
rules for driver use too. Find out where you
can get your own copy to use on the job.
COVER 149 CONTENTS
The regulations require training and testing
for all drivers involved in transporting
hazardous materials. Your employer or a
designated representative is required to
provide this training and testing. Hazardous
materials employers are required to keep
a record of that training for each employee
as long as that employee is working with
hazardous materials, and for 90 days
thereafter. The regulations require that
hazardous materials employees be trained
and tested at least once every three years.
All drivers must be trained in the security
risks of hazardous materials transportation.
This training must include how to recognize
and respond to possible security threats.
The regulations also require that drivers have
special training before operating a vehicle
transporting certain flammable gas materials
or highway route controlled quantities of
radioactive materials. In addition, drivers
transporting cargo tanks and portable
tanks must receive specialized training.
Each driver's employer or their designated
representative must provide such training.
Some locations require permits to transport
certain explosives or bulk hazardous wastes.
States and counties also may require drivers
to follow special hazardous materials
routes. The federal government may require
permits or exemptions for special hazardous
materials cargo such as rocket fuel. Find
out about permits, exemptions and special
routes for the places you drive.
9.1 The intent of
the regulations
9.1.1 Contain the material
Transporting hazardous materials can
be risky. The regulations are intended to
protect you, those around you and the
environment. They inform shippers about
how to package the materials safely, and
drivers on how to load, transport and
unload the material. These are called
"containment rules."
9.1.2 Communicate the risk
To communicate the risk, shippers must
warn drivers and others about the material's
hazards. The regulations require shippers
to put hazard warning labels on packages,
provide proper shipping papers, emergency
response information and placards. These
steps communicate the hazard to the
shipper, the carrier and the driver.
9.1.3 Assure safe drivers
and equipment
In order to get a hazardous materials
endorsement on a CDL, you must pass a
written test about transporting hazardous
materials. To pass the test, you must know
how to:
· Identify what are hazardous materials.
· Safely load shipments.
· Properly placard your vehicle in
accordance with the rules.
· Safely transport shipments.
Learn the rules and follow them. Following
the rules reduces the risk of injury from
hazardous materials. Taking shortcuts by
breaking rules is unsafe. Non-compliance
with regulations can result in fines and jail.
COVER 150 CONTENTS
Inspect your vehicle before and during each
trip. Law enforcement officers may stop
and inspect your vehicle. They may check
your shipping papers, vehicle placards,
the hazardous materials endorsement on
your driver license, and your knowledge of
hazardous materials.
9.2 Hazardous materials
transportation­Who
does what
9.2.1 The shipper
· Sends products from one place to another
by truck, rail, vessel, or airplane.
· Uses the hazardous materials regulations
to determine the product's:
 Identification number
 Proper shipping name
 Hazard class
 Packing group
 Correct packaging
 Correct label and markings
 Correct placards
· Must package, mark, and label the
materials
· Prepare shipping papers
· Provide emergency response information
· Supply placards
· Certify on the shipping paper that the
shipment has been prepared according
to the rules (unless you are pulling cargo
tanks supplied by you or your employer).
9.2.2 The carrier
· Takes the shipment from the shipper to
its destination.
· Prior to transportation, checks that the
shipper correctly described, marked,
labeled, and otherwise prepared the
shipment for transportation.
· Refuses improper shipments.
· Reports accidents and incidents
involving hazardous materials to the
proper government agency.
9.2.3 The driver
· Makes sure the shipper has identified,
marked, and labeled the hazardous
materials properly.
· Refuses leaking packages and shipments.
· Placards vehicle when loading, if
required.
· Safely transports the shipment without
delay.
· Follows all special rules about
transporting hazardous materials.
· Keeps hazardous materials shipping
papers and emergency response
information in the proper place.
COVER 151 CONTENTS
9.3 Communication rules
9.3.1 Definitions
Some words and phrases have
special meanings when talking about
hazardous materials. Some of these
may differ from meanings you are
used to. The words and phrases in
this section may be on your test. The
meanings of other important words
are in the glossary at the end of
Section 9.
A material's hazard class reflects the
risks associated with it. There are
nine different hazard classes. The
types of materials included in these
nine classes are in Figure 9.1.
Figure 9-1: Hazardous Materials Hazard Class/
Division Table
CLASS DIVISION
NAME OF
CLASS OR
DIVISION
EXAMPLE
1
1.1 Mass Explosion Dynamite
1.2 Projection
Hazard Flares
1.3 Fire Hazard Display
Fireworks
1.4 Minor Explosion Ammunition
1.5 Very Insensitive Blasting Agents
1.6 Extremely
Insensitive
Explosive
Devices
2
2.1 Flammable
Gases Propane
2.2 Non-Flammable
Gases Helium
2.3 Poisonous/Toxic
Gases
Fluorine,
Compressed
3 -­- Flammable
Liquids
Gasoline
4
4.1 Flammable
Solids
Ammonium
Picrate, Wetted
4.2 Spontaneously
Combustible
White
Phosphorus
4.3 Dangerous When
Wet Sodium
5
5.1 Oxidizers Ammonium
Nitrate
5.2 Organic
Peroxides
Methyl Ethyl
Ketone
Peroxide
6
6.1 Poison (Toxic
Material)
Potassium
Cyanide
6.2 Infectious
Substances Anthrax Virus
7 - Radioactive Uranium
8 - Corrosives Battery Fluid
9 -
Miscellaneous
Hazardous
Materials
Polychlorinated
Biphenyls
(PCB)
None -
ORM-D (Other
Regulated
Material-
Domestic)
Food
Flavorings,
Medicines
- Combustible
Liquids Fuel Oil
COVER 152 CONTENTS
A shipping paper describes the hazardous
materials being transported. Shipping
orders, bills of lading, and manifests are
all shipping papers. Figure 9-6 shows an
example shipping paper. After an accident
or hazardous materials spill or leak, you
may be injured and unable to communicate
the hazards of the materials you are
transporting. Firefighters and police can
prevent or reduce the amount of damage
or injury at the scene if they know what
hazardous materials are being carried.
Your life, and the lives of others, may
depend on quickly locating the hazardous
materials shipping papers. For that reason
the rules require:
· Shippers to describe hazardous materials
correctly and include an emergency
response telephone number on shipping
papers.
· Carriers and drivers to quickly identify
hazardous materials shipping papers,
or to keep them on top of other shipping
papers and keep the required emergency
response information with the shipping
papers.
· Drivers to keep hazardous materials
shipping papers:
 In a pouch on the driver's door, or
 In clear view within immediate reach
while the seat belt is fastened while
driving, or
 On the driver's seat when out of the
vehicle.
9.3.2 Package labels
Shippers put diamond-shaped hazard
warning labels on most hazardous materials
packages. These labels inform others of the
hazard. If the diamond label won't fit on
the package, shippers may put the label on
a tag securely attached to the package. For
example, compressed gas cylinders that will
not hold a label will have tags or decals.
Labels look like the examples shown in
Figure 9-2.
Figure 9-2: Example of HAZMAT Labels
9.3.3 Lists of regulated
products
Placards. Placards are used to warn others
of hazardous materials. Placards are signs
put on the outside of a vehicle and on bulk
packages, which identify the hazard class of
the cargo.
A placarded vehicle must have at least four
identical placards. They are put on the
front, rear and both sides of the vehicle. See
Figure 9.3a.
Placards must be readable from all four
directions. They are at least 250mm or
9.84 inches square, square-on-point, in a
diamond shape.
Cargo tanks and other bulk packaging
display the identification number of their
contents on placards or orange panels or
white square-on-point displays that are the
same size as placards.
COVER 153 CONTENTS
Figure 9-3a: Placard and Panel Locations Figure 9-3b: Examples of Hazmat Placards
Identification numbers are a four-digit code used by first responders to identify hazardous
materials. An identification number may be used to identify more than one chemical. The
letters "NA" or "UN" will precede the identification number. The United States Department
of Transportation's Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG) lists the chemicals and the
identification numbers assigned to them.
Figure 9-4: Part of the Hazardous Materials Table
49 CFR 172.101 Hazardous Materials Table
Symbols
Hazardous
materials
description
and proper
shipping names
Hazard
class or
Division
Identifi-
cation
Numbers
PG Label
Codes
Special
provisions
(172.102)
Packaging 173.***
Exceptions Non-bulk Bulk
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8a) (8b) (8c)
A Acetaldehyde
ammonia 9 UN1841 III 9
IB8, IP3,
IP7, T1,
TP33
155 204 240
There are three main lists used by shippers, carriers, and drivers when trying to identify
hazardous materials. Before transporting a material, look for its name on all three lists. Some
materials are on all lists, others on only one. Always check the following lists:
· Section 172.101 the Hazardous Materials Table (see example in Figure 9-4);
· Appendix A to Section 172.101, the List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable
Quantities (see Figure 9-5); and
· Appendix B to Section 172.101, the List of Marine Pollutants.
COVER 154 CONTENTS
+
Shows the proper shipping name,
hazard class, and packing group to
use, even if the material does not
meet the hazard class definition.
A
Means the hazardous material described
in Column 2 is subject to the HMR
only when offered or intended for
transport by air unless it is a hazardous
substance or hazardous waste.
W
Means the hazardous material
described in Column 2 is subject
to the HMR only when offered or
intended for transportation by water
unless it is a hazardous substance,
hazardous waste or marine pollutant.
D
Means the proper shipping name is
appropriate for describing materials for
domestic transportation, but may not be
proper for international transportation.
I
Identifies a proper shipping name
that is used to describe materials in
international transportation. A different
shipping name may be used when only
domestic transportation is involved.
G
Means this hazardous material
described in Column 2 is a generic
shipping name. A generic shipping
name must be accompanied by a
technical name on the shipping paper.
A technical name is a specific chemical
that makes the product hazardous.
Column 2 lists the proper shipping names
and descriptions of regulated materials.
Entries are in alphabetical order so you can
more quickly find the right entry. The table
shows proper shipping names in regular
type. The shipping paper must show proper
shipping names. Names shown in italics are
not proper shipping names.
Column 3 shows a material's hazard class
or division, or the entry "Forbidden." Never
transport a "Forbidden" material. Placard
hazardous materials shipments based on the
quantity and hazard class. You can decide
which placards to use if you know these
three things:
· Material's hazard class.
· Amount being shipped.
· Amount of all hazardous materials of all
classes on your vehicle.
Column 4 lists the identification
number for each proper shipping name.
Identification numbers are preceded by the
letters "UN" "NA" or "ID." The letters "NA"
are associated with proper shipping names
that are only used within the United States,
and to and from Canada. The identification
number must appear on the shipping paper
as part of the shipping description and also
appear on the package. It must also appear
on cargo tanks and other bulk packaging.
Police and firefighters use this number to
quickly identify the hazardous materials.
Column 5 shows the packing group (in
Roman numeral) assigned to a material.
Column 6 shows the hazard warning
label(s) shippers must put on packages of
hazardous materials. Some products require
use of more than one label due to multiple
hazards being present.
Column 7 lists the additional (special)
provisions that apply to this material.
When there is an entry in this column, you
must refer to the federal regulations for
The hazardous materials table
Figure 9-4 shows part of the Hazardous
Materials Table. Column 1 tells which
shipping mode(s) the entry affects and
other information concerning the shipping
description. The next five columns show
each material's shipping name, hazard
class or division, identification number,
packaging group and required labels.
Six different symbols may appear in
Column 1 of the table.
COVER 155 CONTENTS
specific information. The numbers 1­6 in
this column mean the hazardous material
is a poison inhalation hazard (PIH). PIH
materials have special requirements for
shipping papers, marking and placards.
Column 8 is a three-part column showing
the section numbers covering the packaging
requirements for each hazardous material.
NOTE: Columns 9 and 10 do not apply to
transportation by highway.
Appendix A to 49 CFR 172.101: The
list of hazardous substances and
reportable quantities
The DOT and the EPA want to know about
spills of hazardous substances. They are
named in the List of Hazardous Substances
and Reportable Quantities. See Figure
9-5. Column 3 of the List shows each
product's reportable quantity (RQ). When
these materials are being transported in
a reportable quantity or greater in one
package, the shipper displays the letters
RQ on the shipping paper and package.
The letters RQ may appear before or after
the basic description. You or your employer
must report any spill of these materials
which occurs in a reportable quantity.
If the words INHALATION HAZARD
appear on the shipping paper or package,
the rules require display of the POISON
INHALATION HAZARD or POISON
GAS placards, as appropriate. These
placards must be used in addition to other
placards which may be required by the
product's hazard class. Always display
the hazard class placard and the POISON
INHALATION HAZARD placard, even for
small amounts.
Figure 9-5: List of Hazardous Substances
Appendix A to 49 CFR 172.101
List of Hazardous Substances and
Reportable Quantities
Hazardous
Substances
Reportable
Quantity
(RQ) Pounds
(kilograms)
Phenyl mercaptan 100 (45.4)
Phenylmercury acetate 100 (45.4)
Phenylthiourea 100 (45.4)
Phorate 10 (4.54)
Phosgene 10 (4.54)
Phosphine 100 (45.4)
Phosphoric acid 5000 (2270)
Phosphoric acid, diethyl
4-nitrophenyl ester 100 (45.4)
Phosphoric acid, lead
(2+) Salt (2:3) salt 10 (4.54)
Appendix B to 49 CFR 172.101: List of
marine pollutants
Appendix B is a listing of chemicals that
are toxic to marine life. For highway
transportation, this list is only used for
chemicals in a container with a capacity of
119 gallons or more without a placard or
label as specified by the HMR.
Any bulk packages of a Marine Pollutant
must display the Marine Pollutant marking
(white triangle with a fish and an "X"
through the fish). This marking (it is
not a placard) must also be displayed on
the outside of the vehicle. In addition, a
notation must be made on the shipping
papers near the description of the material:
"Marine Pollutant."
COVER 156 CONTENTS
Test your knowledge
1. Shippers package in order to (fill in the
blank) the material.
2. Drivers placard their vehicle to (fill in the
blank) the risk.
3. What three things do you need to know
to decide which placards, if any, are
needed?
4. A hazardous materials identification
number must appear on the (fill in the
blank) and on the (fill in the blank).
The identification number must also
appear on cargo tanks and other bulk
packagings.
5. Where must you keep shipping papers
describing hazardous materials?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
Section 9 through subsection 9.3.3.
9.3.4 The shipping paper
The shipping paper shown in Figure 9-6
describes a shipment. A shipping paper for
hazardous materials must include:
· Page numbers if the shipping paper
has more than one page. The first page
must tell the total number of pages. For
example, "Page 1 of 4."
· A proper shipping description for each
hazardous material.
· A shipper's certification, signed by the
shipper, indicating they prepared the
shipment according to the regulations.
9.3.5 The item description
If a shipping paper describes both hazardous
and non-hazardous products, the hazardous
materials must be either:
· Entered first, or
· Highlighted in a contrasting color, or
· Identified by an "X" placed before the
shipping description (ID#, Shipping
Name, Hazard Class, Packing Group) in a
column captioned "HM." The letters "RQ"
may be used instead of "X" if a reportable
quantity needs to be identified.
The basic description of hazardous materials
includes the identification number, proper
shipping name, hazard class or division,
and the packing group, if any, in that order.
The packing group is displayed in Roman
numerals and may be preceded by "PG."
Identification number, shipping name and
hazard class must not be abbreviated unless
specifically authorized in the hazardous
materials regulations. The description must
also show:
· The total quantity and unit of measure.
· The number and type of packages
(example: "6 Drums").
· The letters RQ, if a reportable quantity.
· If the letters RQ appear, the name of the
hazardous substance (if not included in
the shipping name).
· For all materials with the letter "G"
(Generic) in Column 1, the technical name
of the hazardous material.
Shipping papers must also list an emergency
response telephone number (unless
excepted). The emergency response telephone
number is the responsibility of the shipper.
It can be used by emergency responders to
obtain information about any hazardous
COVER 157 CONTENTS
Shipper Paper Page 1 of 1
TO: Wafers R US
88 Valley Street
Silicon Junction, CA 93124
FROM: Essex Corporation
5775 Dawson Avenue
Coleta, CA 93117
QTY HM Description Weight
1 cyl RQ*
UN1076**, Phosgene***,
2.3****, 25 lbs
Poison, Inhalation
Hazard, Zone A
25 lbs
This is to certify that the above named materials are properly classified, described, packaged,
marked and labeled, and are in proper condition for transportation according to the applicable
regulations of the Department of Transportation.
Shipper: Essex Corp
Per: Shultz
Date: 6/27/2020
Carrier: Knuckle Bros.
Per: Jones
Date: 7/1/2020
Special instructions: 24 Hr. Emergency Contact, Ed Shultz, 1-800-555-5555
*RQ means this is a reportable quantity, **ID Number (UN1076) comes from Column 4 of the Hazardous
Materials Table, ***Proper Shipping Name (Phosgene) comes from Column 2 of the Hazardous Materials Table,
and the ****Hazard Class (2.3) comes from Column 3 of the Hazardous Materials Table.
The emergency response information must be able to be used away from the motor vehicle
and must provide information on how to safely handle incidents involving the material. At a
minimum, it must include the following information:
· The basic description and technical name;
· Immediate hazards to health;
· Risks of fire or explosion;
· Immediate precautions to be taken in the event of an accident or incident;
· Immediate methods for handling fires;
· Initial methods for handling spills or leaks in the absence of fires; and
· Preliminary first aid measures.
materials involved in a spill or fire. The
telephone number must be:
· The number of the person offering the
hazardous material for transportation
if the shipper/offerer is the emergency
response information (ERI) provider; or
· The number of an agency or organization
capable of, and accepting responsibility
for, providing the detailed information
required by paragraph (a)(2) of this
section. The person who is registered
with the ERI provider must be identified
by name, contract number or other
unique identifier assigned by the ERI
provider, on the shipping paper.
Figure 9-6: Example of Shipping Paper
Shippers must also provide emergency response information to the motor carrier for each
hazardous material being shipped.
COVER 158 CONTENTS
Such information can be on the shipping
paper or some other document that includes
the basic description and technical name
of the hazardous material. Or, it may be in
a guidance book such as the Emergency
Response Guidebook (ERG). Motor carriers
may assist shippers by keeping an ERG on
each vehicle carrying hazardous materials.
The driver must provide the emergency
response information to any federal, state, or
local authority responding to or investigating
a hazardous materials incident.
Total quantity, number and type of packages
must appear before or after the basic
description. The packaging type and the
unit of measurement may be abbreviated.
For example:
10 ctns. UN1263, Paint, 3, PG II, 500 lbs.
The shipper of hazardous wastes must put
the word WASTE before the proper shipping
name of the material on the shipping paper
(hazardous waste manifest). For example:
UN1090, Waste Acetone, 3, PG II.
A non-hazardous material may not be
described by using a hazard class or an
identification number.
Shippers must keep a copy of shipping papers
(or an electronic image) for a period of 2
years (3 years for hazardous waste) after the
material is accepted by the initial carrier.
If one provides a carrier service only and is
not the originator of the shipment, a carrier
is required to keep a copy of the shipping
paper (or an electronic image) for a period of
1 year.
IMPORTANT NOTE: To view
complete regulatory requirements for the
transportation of hazardous materials
one should refer to the Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 49, Parts 171­180.
9.3.6 Shipper's certification
When the shipper packages hazardous
materials, he/she certifies that the package
has been prepared according to the rules.
The signed shipper's certification appears
on the original shipping paper. The only
exceptions are when a shipper is a private
carrier transporting their own product
and when the package is provided by the
carrier (for example, a cargo tank). Unless
a package is clearly unsafe or does not
comply with the HMR, you may accept the
shipper's certification concerning proper
packaging. Some carriers have additional
rules about transporting hazardous
materials. Follow your employer's rules
when accepting shipments
9.3.7 Package markings
and labels
Shippers print required markings directly
on the package, an attached label or tag.
An important package marking is the name
of the hazardous material. It is the same
name as the one on the shipping paper. The
requirements for marking vary by package
size and material being transported. When
required, the shipper will put the following
on the package:
· The name and address of shipper or
consignee.
· The hazardous material's identification
number and shipping name.
· The labels required.
It is a good idea to compare the shipping
paper to the markings and labels. Always
make sure that the shipper shows the
correct basic description on the shipping
paper and verifies that the proper labels
are shown on the packages. If you are not
COVER 159 CONTENTS
familiar with the material, ask the shipper
to contact your office.
If rules require it, the shipper also will put
RQ, MARINE POLLUTANT, BIOHAZARD,
HOT or INHALATION-HAZARD on the
package. Packages with liquid containers
inside will also have package orientation
markings with the arrows pointing in
the correct upright direction. The labels
used always reflect the hazard class of the
product. If a package needs more than one
label, the labels must be close together, near
the proper shipping name.
9.3.8 Recognizing
hazardous materials
Learn to recognize shipments of hazardous
materials. To find out if the shipment
includes hazardous materials, look at the
shipping paper. Does it have:
· An entry with a proper shipping name,
hazard class and identification number?
· A highlighted entry, or one with an X or
RQ in the hazardous materials column?
Other clues suggesting hazardous materials:
· What type of business is shipping the
material? Paint dealer? Chemical supply?
Scientific supply house? Pest control
or agricultural supplier? Explosives,
munitions or fireworks dealer?
· Are there tanks with diamond labels or
placards on the premises?
· What type of package is being shipped?
Cylinders and drums are often used for
hazardous materials shipments.
· Is a hazard class label, proper shipping
name or identification number on the
package?
· Are there any handling precautions?
9.3.9 Hazardous waste manifest
When transporting hazardous wastes, you
must sign by hand and carry a Uniform
Hazardous Waste Manifest. The name and
EPA registration number of the shippers,
carriers, and destination must appear
on the manifest. Shippers must prepare,
date, and sign the manifest by hand. Treat
the manifest as a shipping paper when
transporting the waste. Only give the waste
shipment to another registered carrier or
disposal/treatment facility. Each carrier
transporting the shipment must sign the
manifest by hand. After you deliver the
shipment, keep your copy of the manifest.
Each copy must have all needed signatures
and dates, including those of the person to
whom you delivered the waste.
9.3.10 Placarding
Attach the appropriate placards to the
vehicle before you drive it. You are only
allowed to move an improperly placarded
vehicle during an emergency, in order to
protect life or property.
Placards must appear on both sides and both
ends of the vehicle. Each placard must be:
· Easily seen from the direction it faces.
· Placed so the words or numbers are level
and read from left to right.
· At least 3 inches away from any other
markings.
· Kept clear of attachments or devices such
as ladders, doors, and tarpaulins.
· Be affixed to a background of contrasting
color.
· The use of Drive Safely and other slogans
is prohibited.
· The front placard may be on the front of
the tractor or the front of the trailer.
COVER 160 CONTENTS
· Kept clean and undamaged so the color,
format, and message are easily seen.
To decide which placards to use, you need to
know:
· The hazard class of the materials.
· The amount of hazardous materials
shipped.
· The total weight of all classes of
hazardous materials in your vehicle.
9.3.11 Placard tables
There are two placard tables, Table 1 and
Table 2. Table 1 materials must be placarded
whenever any amount is transported. See
Figure 9-7.
Figure 9-7 Placard Table 1: any amount
If your vehicle
contains any
amount of ...
Placard as ...
1.1 Mass Explosives Explosives 1.1
1.2 Project Hazards Explosives 1.2
1.3 Mass Fire Hazards Explosives 1.3
2.3 Poisonous/
Toxic Gases Poison Gas
4.3 Dangerous
When Wet
Dangerous
When Wet
5.2 (Organic Peroxide,
Type B, liquid or solid,
Temperature controlled)
Organic Peroxide
6.1 (Inhalation hazard
zone A and B only)
Poison/Toxic
Inhalation
7 (Radioactive Yellow
III label only) Radioactive
Except for bulk packagings, the hazard
classes in Table 2 need placards only if the
total amount transported is 1,001 pounds
or more including the package. Add the
amounts from all shipping papers for all
the Table 2 products you have on board. See
Figure 9-8.
You may use DANGEROUS placards instead
of separate placards for each Table 2 hazard
class when:
· You have 1,001 pounds or more of two or
more Table 2 hazard classes, requiring
different placards, and
· You have not loaded 2,205 pounds
or more of any Table 2 hazard class
material at any one place. (You must use
the specific placard for this material.)
The DANGEROUS placard is an option, not
a requirement. You can always placard for
the materials.
If the words INHALATION HAZARD
are on the shipping paper or package, you
must display POISON GAS or POISON
INHALATION placards in addition to any
other placards needed by the product's
hazard class. The 1,000 pound exception
does not apply to these materials.
Materials with a secondary hazard of
dangerous when wet must display the
DANGEROUS WHEN WET placard in
addition to any other placards needed by
the product's hazard class. The 1,000-pound
exception to placarding does not apply to
these materials.
Placards used to identify the primary or
subsidiary hazard class of a material must
have the hazard class or division number
displayed in the lower corner of the placard.
Permanently affixed subsidiary hazard
placards without the hazard class number
may be used as long as they stay within
color specifications.
Placards may be displayed for hazardous
materials even if not required, as long as the
placard identifies the hazard of the material
being transported.
COVER 161 CONTENTS
Category of Material
(Hazard class or
division number and
additional description,
as appropriate)
Placard Name
1.4 Minor Explosion Explosives 1.4
1.5 Very Insensitive Explosives 1.5
1.6 Extremely Insensitive Explosives 1.6
2.1 Flammable Gases Flammable Gas
2.2 Non-Flammable Gases Non-Flammable
Gas
3 Flammable Liquids Flammable
Combustible Liquid Combustible*
4.1 Flammable Solids Flammable
Solid
4.2 Spontaneously
Combustible
Spontaneously
Combustible
5.1 Oxidizers Oxidizer
5.2 (Other than organic
peroxide, Type B, liquid
or solid, Temperature
controlled)
Organic
Peroxide
6.1 (Other than inhalation
hazard zone A or B) Poison
6.2 Infectious Substances (None)
8 Corrosives Corrosive
9 Miscellaneous
Hazardous Materials Class 9**
ORM-D (None)
* FLAMMABLE placard may be used
in place of a COMBUSTIBLE placard
on a cargo tank or portable tank.
** Class 9 Placard is not required
for domestic transportation.
Test your knowledge
1. What is a shipper's certification? Where
does it appear? Who signs it?
2. When may non-hazardous materials be
described by hazard class words or ID
numbers?
3. Name five hazard classes that require
placarding in any amount.
4. A shipment described on the Hazardous
Waste Manifest may only be delivered
to another (fill in the blank) carrier or
treatment facility, which then signs the
(fill in the blank) giving you a copy which
you must keep.
5. Your load includes 20 pounds of Division
2.3 gas and 1,001 pounds of flammable
gas. What placards do you need, if any?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
Section 9 through subsection 9.3
Bulk packaging is a single container with
a capacity greater than 119 gallons. A bulk
package, and a vehicle transporting a bulk
package, must be placarded, even if it only
has the residue of a hazardous material.
Certain bulk packages only have to be
placarded on the two opposite sides or may
display labels. All other bulk packages must
be placarded on all four sides.
Figure 9-8 Placard Table 2: 1001 lbs or more
COVER 162 CONTENTS
9.4 Loading and unloading
Do all you can to protect containers of
hazardous materials. Do not use any tools
which might damage containers or other
packaging during loading. Do not use hooks.
9.4.1 General loading
requirements
Before loading or unloading, set the parking
brake. Make sure the vehicle will not move.
Many products become more hazardous
when exposed to heat. Load hazardous
materials away from heat sources.
Watch for signs of leaking or damaged
containers: LEAKS SPELL TROUBLE! Do
not transport leaking packages. Depending
on the material, you, your truck and others
could be in danger. It is illegal to move a
vehicle with leaking hazardous materials.
Containers of hazardous materials must be
braced to prevent movement of the packages
during transportation.
No smoking
When loading or unloading hazardous
materials, keep fire away. Do not let people
smoke nearby. Never smoke around:
· Class 1: Explosives
· Class 2.1: Flammable Gas
· Class 3: Flammable Liquids
· Class 4: Flammable Solids
· Class 5: Oxidizers
Secure against movement
Brace containers so they will not fall, slide
or bounce around during transportation. Be
very careful when loading containers that
have valves or other fittings. All hazardous
materials packages must be secured during
transportation.
After loading, do not open any package
during your trip. Never transfer hazardous
materials from one package to another while
in transit. You may empty a cargo tank, but
do not empty any other package while it is
on the vehicle.
Cargo heater rules
There are special cargo heater rules for
loading:
· Class 1: Explosives
· Class 2.1: Flammable Gas
· Class 3: Flammable Liquids
The rules usually forbid use of cargo
heaters, including automatic cargo heater/
air conditioner units. Unless you have read
all the related rules, do not load the above
products in a cargo space that has a heater.
Use closed cargo space
You cannot have overhang or tailgate loads
of:
· Class 1: Explosives
· Class 4: Flammable Solids
· Class 5: Oxidizers
You must load these hazardous materials
into a closed cargo space unless all packages
are:
· Fire and water resistant.
· Covered with a fire and water resistant
tarp.
Precautions for specific hazards
Class 1 (Explosives) Materials
Turn your engine off before loading or
unloading any explosives. Then check the
cargo space. You must:
· Disable cargo heaters. Disconnect heater
power sources and drain heater fuel
tanks.
COVER 163 CONTENTS
· Make sure there are no sharp points that
might damage cargo. Look for bolts,
screws, nails, broken side panels and
broken floor boards.
· Use a floor lining with Division 1.1, 1.2 or
1.3. The floors must be tight and the liner
must be either non-metallic material or
non-ferrous metal. (Non-ferrous metals
are any metal that does not contain iron
or iron alloys.)
Use extra care to protect explosives. Never
use hooks or other metal tools. Never drop,
throw, or roll packages. Protect explosive
packages from other cargo that might cause
damage.
Do not transfer a Division 1.1, 1.2 or 1.3 from
one vehicle to another on a public roadway
except in an emergency. If safety requires
an emergency transfer, set out red warning
reflectors, flags or electric lanterns. You
must warn others on the road.
Never transport damaged packages of
explosives. Do not take a package that shows
any dampness or oily stain.
Do not transport Division 1.1 or 1.2 in triples
or in vehicle combinations if:
· There is a marked or placarded cargo
tank in the combination.
· The other vehicle in the combination
contains:
 Division 1.1 A (Initiating Explosives)
 Packages of Class 7 (Radioactive)
materials labeled "Yellow III,"
 Division 2.3 (Poisonous Gas) or
Division 6.1 (Poisonous) material
 Hazardous materials in a portable
tank, on a DOT Spec 106A or 110A
tank.
Class 4 (Flammable Solids) and Class 5
(Oxidizers) Materials
Class 4 materials are solids that react
(including fire and explosion) to water, heat
and air or even react spontaneously.
Class 4 and 5 materials must be completely
enclosed in a vehicle or covered securely.
Class 4 and 5 materials, which become
unstable and dangerous when wet, must be
kept dry while in transit and during loading
and unloading. Materials that are subject to
spontaneous combustion or heating must be
in vehicles with sufficient ventilation.
Class 8 (Corrosive) Materials
If loading by hand, load breakable
containers of corrosive liquid one by one.
Keep them right side up. Do not drop or
roll the containers. Load them onto an even
floor surface. Stack carboys only if the lower
tiers can bear the weight of the upper tiers
safely.
Do not load nitric acid above any other
product.
Load charged storage batteries so their
liquid won't spill. Keep them right side up.
Make sure other cargo won't fall against or
short circuit them.
Never load corrosive liquids next to or
above:
· Division 1.4 (Explosives C)
· Division 4.1 (Flammable Solids)
· Division 4.3 (Dangerous When Wet)
· Class 5 (Oxidizers)
· Division 2.3, Zone B (Poisonous Gases)
COVER 164 CONTENTS
DO NOT LOAD... IN THE SAME VEHICLE WITH...
Division 6.1 or 2.3 (POISON
or poison inhalation
hazard labeled material)
Animal or human food unless the poison package
is over packed in an approved way. Foodstuffs
are anything you swallow. However, mouthwash,
toothpaste and skin creams are not foodstuff.
Division 2.3 (Poisonous)
gas Zone A or Division 6.1
(Poison) liquids, PGI, Zone A
Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Explosives, Division 5.1 (Oxidizers),
Class 3 (Flammable Liquids), Class 8 (Corrosive Liquids),
Division 5.2 (Organic Peroxides), Division 1.5 (Blasting Agents),
Division 2.1 (Flammable Gases), Class 4 (Flammable Solids).
Charged storage batteries Division 1.1.
Class 1 (Detonating primers) Any other explosives unless in authorized containers or packages.
Division 6.1 (Cyanides
or cyanide mixtures)
Acids, corrosive materials or other acidic materials
which could release hydrocyanic acid. For example:
Cyanides, Inorganic, n.o.s.
Silver Cyanide
Sodium Cyanide
Nitric Acid (Class 8) Other materials unless the nitric acid is not
loaded above any other material.
Never load corrosive liquids with:
· Division 1.1 or 1.2
· Division 1.2 or 1.3
· Division 1.5 (Blasting Agents)
· Division 2.3, Zone A (Poisonous Gases)
· Division 4.2 (Spontaneously Combustible
Materials)
· Division 6.1, PGI, Zone A
(Poison Liquids)
Class 2 (Compressed Gases) Including
Cryogenic Liquids
If your vehicle doesn't have racks to hold
cylinders, the cargo space floor must be flat.
The cylinders must be:
· Held upright
· In racks attached to the vehicle or in
boxes that will keep them from turning
over.
Cylinders may be loaded in a horizontal
position (lying down) if designed so the
relief valve is in the vapor space.
Division 2.3 (Poisonous Gas) or Division 6.1
(Poisonous) materials
Never transport these materials in
containers with interconnections. Never
load a package labeled POISON or POISON
INHALATION HAZARD in the driver's cab
or sleeper or with food material for human
or animal consumption. There are special
rules for loading and unloading Class 2
materials in cargo tanks. You must have
special training to do this.
Class 7 (Radioactive) Materials
Some packages of Class 7 (radioactive)
materials bear a number called the
"transport index." The shipper labels these
packages Radioactive II or Radioactive
III, and prints the package's transport
index on the label. Radiation surrounds
each package, passing through all nearby
packages. To deal with this problem,
the number of packages you can load
together is controlled. Their closeness
to people, animals, and unexposed film
Figure 9-9: Prohibited Loading Combination
COVER 165 CONTENTS
is also controlled. The transport index
tells the degree of control needed during
transportation. The total transport index
of all packages in a single vehicle must not
exceed 50.
Figure 9-10: Radioactive Separation Table
A to this section (49 CFR 177-842) shows
rules for each transport index. It shows how
closely you can load Class 7 (radioactive)
materials to people, animals or film. For
example, you cannot leave a package with a
transport index of 1.1 within 2 feet of people
or cargo space walls.
Mixed loads
The rules require some products to be
loaded separately. You cannot load them
together in the same cargo space. Figure 9-9
lists some examples. The regulations (the
Segregation Table for Hazardous Materials)
name other materials you must keep apart.
Test your knowledge
1. Around which hazard classes must you
never smoke?
2. Which three hazard classes should not be
loaded into a trailer that has a heater/air
conditioner unit?
3. Should the floor liner required for
Division 1.1 or 1.2 be stainless steel?
4. At the shipper's dock you're given a
paper for 100 cartons of battery acid. You
already have 100 pounds of dry Silver
Cyanide on board. What precautions do
you need to take?
5. Name a hazard class that uses transport
indexes to determine the amount that
can be loaded in a single vehicle.
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsection 9.4.
9.5 Bulk packaging marking,
loading and unloading
The glossary at the end of this section
gives the meaning of the word bulk. Cargo
tanks are bulk packaging permanently
attached to a vehicle. Cargo tanks remain
on the vehicle when you load and unload
them. Portable tanks are bulk packaging
which are not permanently attached to a
vehicle. The product is loaded or unloaded
while the portable tanks are off the vehicle.
Portable tanks are then put on a vehicle
for transportation. There are many types
of cargo tanks in use. The most common
cargo tanks are MC306 for liquids and
MC331 for gases.
9.5.1 Markings
You must display the identification number
of the hazardous materials in portable tanks
and cargo tanks and other bulk packagings
(such as dump trucks). Identification
numbers are in column 4 of the Hazardous
Materials Table. The rules require black 100
mm (3.9 inch) numbers on orange panels,
placards, or a white, diamond-shaped
background if no placards are required.
Specification cargo tanks must show re-test
date markings.
Portable tanks must also show the lessee
or owner's name. They must also display
the shipping name of the contents on
two opposing sides. The letters of the
shipping name must be at least 2 inches
tall on portable tanks with capacities of
more than 1,000 gallons and 1 inch tall on
portable tanks with capacities of less than
1,000 gallons. The identification number
must appear on each side and each end of
a portable tank or other bulk packaging
that hold 1,000 gallons or more and on two
COVER 166 CONTENTS
opposing sides, if the portable tank holds
less than 1,000 gallons. The identification
numbers must still be visible when the
portable tank is on the motor vehicle. If
they are not visible, you must display the
identification number on both sides and
ends of the motor vehicle.
Intermediate bulk containers (IBCs) are
bulk packages, but are not required to have
the owner's name or shipping name.
9.5.2 Tank loading
The person in charge of loading and
unloading a cargo tank must be sure a
qualified person is always watching. This
person watching the loading or unloading
must:
· Be alert.
· Have a clear view of the cargo tank.
· Be within 25 feet of the tank.
· Know of the hazards of the materials
involved.
· Know the procedures to follow in an
emergency, and
· Be authorized to move the cargo tank
and able to do so.
There are special attendance rules for cargo
tanks transporting propane and anhydrous
ammonia.
Close all manholes and valves before
moving a tank of hazardous materials, no
matter how small the amount in the tank
or how short the distance. Manholes and
valves must be closed to prevent leaks. It
is illegal to move a cargo tank with open
valves or covers unless it is empty according
to 49 CFR 173.29.
9.5.3 Flammable liquids
Turn off your engine before loading or
unloading any flammable liquids. Only run
the engine if needed to operate a pump.
Ground a cargo tank correctly before filling
it through an open filling hole. Ground the
tank before opening the filling hole, and
maintain the ground until after closing the
filling hole.
9.5.4 Compressed gas
Keep liquid discharge valves on a
compressed gas tank closed except when
loading and unloading. Unless your engine
runs a pump for product transfer, turn it off
when loading or unloading. If you use the
engine, turn it off after product transfer,
before you unhook the hose. Unhook all
loading/unloading connections before
coupling, uncoupling or moving a cargo
tank. Always chock trailers and semi-
trailers to prevent motion when uncoupled
from the power unit.
Test your knowledge
1. What are cargo tanks?
2. How is a portable tank different from a
cargo tank? Your engine runs a pump
used during delivery of compressed gas.
Should you turn off the engine before or
after unhooking hoses after delivery?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsection 9.5.
COVER 167 CONTENTS
9.6 Driving and parking rules
9.6.1 Parking with division
1.1, 1.2 or 1.3 explosives
Never park with Division 1.1, 1.2 or 1.3
explosives within five feet of the traveled
part of the road. Except for short periods of
time needed for vehicle operation necessities
(e.g., fueling), do not park within 300 feet of:
· A bridge, tunnel or building.
· A place where people gather, or
· An open fire.
If you must park to do your job, do so but
only briefly.
Do not park on private property unless the
owner is aware of the danger. Someone must
always watch the parked vehicle. You may
let someone else watch it for you only if your
vehicle is:
· On the shipper's property, or
· On the carrier's property, or
· On the consignee's property.
You are allowed to leave your vehicle
unattended in a safe haven. A safe haven is
an approved place for parking unattended
vehicles loaded with explosives. Designation
of authorized safe havens are usually made
by local authorities.
9.6.2 Parking a placarded
vehicle not transporting
division 1.1, 1.2 or
1.3 explosives
You may park a placarded vehicle (not laden
with explosives) within five feet of the
traveled part of the road only if your work
requires it. Do so only briefly. Someone
must always watch the vehicle when parked
on a public roadway or shoulder. Do not
uncouple a trailer with hazardous materials
and leave it on a public street. Do not park
within 300 feet of an open fire.
9.6.3 Attending parked vehicles
The person attending a placarded vehicle
must:
· Be in the vehicle, awake and not in the
sleeper berth, or within 100 feet of the
vehicle and have it within clear view.
· Be aware of the hazards of the materials
being transported.
· Know what to do in emergencies, and
· Be able to move the vehicle, if needed.
9.6.4 No flares!
If your vehicle breaks down and you need
to use stopped vehicle signals, use only
reflective triangles or red electric lights.
Never use burning signals, such as flares or
fusees, around a:
· Tank used for Class 3 (flammable liquids)
or Division 2.1 (flammable gas) whether
loaded or empty.
· Vehicle loaded with Division 1.1, 1.2 or 1.3
explosives.
9.6.5 Route restrictions
Some states and counties require permits
to transport hazardous materials or wastes.
They may limit the routes you can use.
Local rules about routes and permits change
often. It is your job as driver to find out if
you need permits or must use special routes.
Make sure you have all needed papers
before starting.
If you work for a carrier, ask your dispatcher
about route restrictions or permits. If
you are an independent trucker and are
planning a new route, check with state
agencies where you plan to travel. Some
localities prohibit transportation of
hazardous materials through tunnels, over
bridges, or other roadways. Always check
before you start.
COVER 168 CONTENTS
Whenever placarded, avoid heavily
populated areas, crowds, tunnels, narrow
streets and alleys. Take other routes, even if
inconvenient, unless there is no other way.
Never drive a placarded vehicle near open
fires unless you can safely pass the fire
without stopping.
If transporting Division 1.1, 1.2 or 1.3
explosives, you must have a written route
plan and follow that plan. Carriers prepare
the route plan in advance and give the driver
a copy. You may plan the route yourself if
you pick up the explosives at a location other
than your employer's terminal. Write out the
plan in advance. Keep a copy of it with you
while transporting the explosives. Deliver
shipments of explosives only to authorized
persons or leave them in locked rooms
designed for explosives storage.
A carrier must choose the safest route to
transport placarded radioactive materials.
After choosing the route, the carrier
must tell the driver about the radioactive
materials, and show the route plan.
9.6.6 No smoking
Do not smoke within 25 feet of a placarded
cargo tank used for Class 3 (flammable
liquids) or Division 2.1 (gases). Also, do not
smoke or carry a lighted cigarette, cigar
or pipe within 25 feet of any vehicle which
contains:
· Class 1: Explosives
· Class 3: Flammable Liquids
· Class 4.1: Flammable Solids
· Class 4.2: Spontaneously Combustible
· Class 5: Oxidizers
9.6.7 Refuel with engine off
Turn off your engine before fueling a motor
vehicle containing hazardous materials.
Someone must always be at the nozzle,
controlling fuel flow.
9.6.8 10 B:C Fire extinguisher
The power unit of placarded vehicles must
have a fire extinguisher with a UL rating of
10 B:C or more.
9.6.9 Check tires
Make sure your tires are properly inflated.
You must examine each tire on a motor
vehicle at the beginning of each trip and
each time the vehicle is parked.
The only acceptable way to check tire
pressure is to use a tire pressure gauge.
Do not drive with a tire that is leaking or is
flat, except to go to the nearest safe place
to fix it. Remove any overheated tire. Place
it a safe distance from your vehicle. Don't
drive until you correct the cause of the
overheating. Remember to follow the rules
about parking and attending placarded
vehicles. They apply even when checking,
repairing, or replacing tires.
9.6.10 Where to keep shipping
papers and emergency
response information
Do not accept a hazardous materials
shipment without a properly prepared
shipping paper. A shipping paper for
hazardous materials must always be easily
recognized. Other people must be able to
find it quickly after a crash.
· Clearly distinguish hazardous materials
shipping papers from others by tabbing
them or keeping them on top of the stack
of papers.
COVER 169 CONTENTS
· When you are behind the wheel, keep
shipping papers within your reach (with
your seat belt on), or in a pouch on the
driver's door. They must be easily seen
by someone entering the cab.
· When not behind the wheel, leave
shipping papers in the driver's door
pouch or on the driver's seat.
· Emergency response information must
be kept in the same location as the
shipping paper.
Papers for Division 1.1, 1.2 or 1.3
explosives
A carrier must give each driver transporting
Division 1.1, 1.2 or 1.3 explosives a copy of
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations
(FMCSR), Part 397. The carrier must also
give written instructions on what to do
if delayed or in an accident. The written
instructions must include:
· The names and telephone numbers of
people to contact (including carrier
agents or shippers).
· The nature of the explosives transported.
· The precautions to take in emergencies
such as fires, accidents or leaks.
Drivers must sign a receipt for these
documents.
You must be familiar with, and have in your
possession while driving, the:
· Shipping papers.
· Written emergency instructions.
· Written route plan.
· A copy of FMCSR, Part 397.
9.6.11 Equipment for chlorine
A driver transporting chlorine in cargo
tanks must have an approved gas mask in
the vehicle. The driver must also have an
emergency kit for controlling leaks in dome
cover plate fittings on the cargo tank.
9.6.12 Stop before
railroad crossings
Stop before a railroad crossing if your
vehicle:
· Is placarded, or
· Carries any amount of chlorine, or
· Has cargo tanks, whether loaded or
empty, used for hazardous materials.
You must stop 15 to 50 feet before the
nearest rail. Proceed only when you are sure
no train is coming and you can clear the
tracks without stopping. Don't shift gears
while crossing the tracks.
9.7 Hazardous
materials­emergencies
· No Smoking
· Warn Others
· Keep People Away
· Avoid Contact or Inhaling
9.7.1 Emergency response
guidebook (ERG)
The U.S. Department of Transportation
has a guidebook for firefighters, police
and industry workers on how to protect
themselves and the public from hazardous
materials. The guide is indexed by proper
shipping name and hazardous materials
identification number. Emergency personnel
look for these things on the shipping
paper. That is why it is vital that the proper
shipping name, identification number, label
and placards are correct.
COVER 170 CONTENTS
9.7.2 Crashes/incidents
As a professional driver, your job at the
scene of a crash or incident is to:
· Keep people away from the scene.
· Limit the spread of material, only if you
can safely do so.
· Communicate the danger of the
hazardous materials to emergency
response personnel.
· Provide shipping papers and emergency
response information to emergency
responders.
Follow this checklist:
· Check to see that your driving partner is
OK.
· Keep shipping papers with you.
· Keep people far away and upwind.
· Warn others of the danger.
· Call for help.
· Follow your employer's instructions.
9.7.3 Fires
You may need to control minor truck
fires on the road. However, unless you
have the training and equipment to
do so safely, don't fight hazardous
materials fires. Dealing with hazardous
materials fires requires special training and
protective gear.
When you discover a fire, call for help. You
may use the fire extinguisher to keep minor
truck fires from spreading to cargo before
firefighters arrive. Feel trailer doors to see
if they are hot before opening them. If hot,
you may have a cargo fire and should not
open the doors. Opening doors lets air in
and may make the fire flare up. Without
air, many fires only smolder until firemen
arrive, doing less damage. If your cargo is
already on fire, it is not safe to fight the fire.
Keep the shipping papers with you to give to
emergency personnel as soon as they arrive.
Warn other people of the danger and
keep them away.
Leaks
If you discover a cargo leak, identify
the hazardous materials leaking by
using shipping papers, labels or package
location. Do not touch any leaking
material many people injure
themselves by touching hazardous
materials. Do not try to identify the
material or find the source of a leak by
smell. Toxic gases can destroy your sense
of smell and can injure or kill you even if
they don't smell. Never eat, drink or smoke
around a leak or spill.
If hazardous materials are spilling from
your vehicle, do not move it any more than
safety requires. You may move off the road
and away from places where people gather,
if doing so serves safety. Only move your
vehicle if you can do so without danger to
yourself or others.
Never continue driving with hazardous
materials leaking from your vehicle in order
to find a phone booth, truck stop, help
or other similar reason. Remember, the
carrier pays for the cleanup of contaminated
parking lots, roadways and drainage ditches.
The costs are enormous, so don't leave a
lengthy trail of contamination. If hazardous
materials are spilling from your vehicle:
· Park it.
· Secure the area.
· Stay there.
· Phone or send someone else for help.
­
COVER 171 CONTENTS
When sending someone for help, give that
person:
· A description of the emergency.
· Your exact location and direction of
travel.
· Your name, the carrier's name and the
name of the community or city where
your terminal is located.
· The proper shipping name, hazard
class and identification number of the
hazardous materials, if you know them.
This is a lot for someone to remember. It
is a good idea to write it all down for the
person you send for help. The emergency
response team must know these things to
find you and to handle the emergency. They
may have to travel miles to get to you. This
information will help them to bring the right
equipment the first time, without needing to
go back for it.
Never move your vehicle, if doing so will
cause contamination or damage the vehicle.
Keep upwind. Stay away from roadside
rests, truck stops, cafes and businesses.
Never try to repack leaking containers.
Unless you have the training and equipment
to repair leaks safely, don't try it. Call your
dispatcher or supervisor for instructions
and, if needed, emergency personnel.
9.7.4 Responses to
specific hazards
Class 1 (Explosives)
If your vehicle has a breakdown or accident
while carrying explosives, warn others of
the danger. Keep bystanders away. Do not
allow smoking or open fire near the vehicle.
If there is a fire, warn everyone of the
danger of explosion.
Remove all explosives before separating
vehicles involved in a collision. Place
the explosives at least 200 feet from the
vehicles and occupied buildings. Stay a safe
distance away.
Class 2 (Compressed gases)
If compressed gas is leaking from your
vehicle, warn others of the danger. Only
permit those involved in removing the
hazard or wreckage to get close. You must
notify the shipper if compressed gas is
involved in any accident.
Unless you are fueling machinery used in
road construction or maintenance, do not
transfer a flammable compressed gas from
one tank to another on any public roadway.
Class 3 (Flammable liquids)
If you are transporting a flammable liquid
and have an accident or your vehicle breaks
down, prevent bystanders from gathering.
Warn people of the danger. Keep them
from smoking.
Never transport a leaking cargo tank
farther than needed to reach a safe place.
Get off the roadway if you can do so safely.
Don't transfer flammable liquid from one
vehicle to another on a public roadway
except in an emergency.
COVER 172 CONTENTS
Class 4 (Flammable solids) and
Class 5 (Oxidizing materials)
If a flammable solid or oxidizing material
spills, warn others of the fire hazard. Do
not open smoldering packages of flammable
solids. Remove them from the vehicle if you
can safely do so. Also, remove unbroken
packages if it will decrease the fire hazard.
Class 6 (Poisonous materials and
infectious substances)
It is your job to protect yourself, other
people and property from harm. Remember
that many products classed as poison are
also flammable. If you think a Division
2.3 (Poison Gases) or Division 6.1 (Poison
Materials) might be flammable, take the
added precautions needed for flammable
liquids or gases. Do not allow smoking,
open flame or welding. Warn others of the
hazards of fire, of inhaling vapors or of
coming in contact with the poison.
A vehicle involved in a leak of Division 2.3
(Poison Gases) or Division 6.1 (Poisons)
must be checked for stray poison before
being used again.
If Division 6.2 (Infectious Substances)
package is damaged in handling or
transportation, you should immediately
contact your supervisor. Packages that
appear to be damaged or show signs of
leakage should not be accepted.
Class 7 (Radioactive materials)
If radioactive material is involved in a leak
or broken package, tell your dispatcher or
supervisor as soon as possible. If there is
a spill, or if an internal container might
be damaged, do not touch or inhale the
material. Do not use the vehicle until it is
cleaned and checked with a survey meter.
Class 8 (Corrosive materials)
If corrosives spill or leak during
transportation, be careful to avoid further
damage or injury when handling the
containers. Parts of the vehicle exposed to a
corrosive liquid must be thoroughly washed
with water. After unloading, wash out the
interior as soon as possible before reloading.
If continuing to transport a leaking tank
would be unsafe, get off the road. If safe to
do so, contain any liquid leaking from the
vehicle. Keep bystanders away from the
liquid and its fumes. Do everything possible
to prevent injury to yourself and others.
9.7.5 Required notification
The National Response Center helps
coordinate emergency response to chemical
hazards. It is a resource to police and
firefighters. It maintains a 24-hour toll-
free line listed below. You or your employer
must phone when any of the following
occur as a direct result of a hazardous
materials incident:
· A person is killed.
· An injured person requires
hospitalization.
· Estimated property damage exceeds
$50,000.
· The general public is evacuated for more
than one hour.
· One or more major transportation
arteries or facilities are closed or shut
down for one hour or more.
· Fire, breakage, spillage or suspected
radioactive contamination occurs.
· Fire, breakage, spillage or suspected
contamination occurs involving
shipment of infectious substances
(bacteria or toxins).
COVER 173 CONTENTS
· The release of a marine pollutant in
a quantity greater than 119 gallons
for a liquid or 882 pounds for a solid;
or a situation exists of such a nature
(e.g., continuing danger to life exists
at the scene of an incident) that, in
the judgment of the carrier, should be
reported.
National Response Center
(800) 424-8802
Persons telephoning the National Response
Center should be ready to give:
· Their name.
· Name and address of the carrier they
work for.
· Phone number where they can be
reached.
· Date, time and location of incident.
· The extent of injuries, if any.
· Classification, name and quantity of
hazardous materials involved, if such
information is available.
Type of incident and nature of hazardous
materials involvement and whether a
continuing danger to life exists at the scene.
If a reportable quantity of hazardous
substance was involved, the caller should
give the name of the shipper and the
quantity of the hazardous substance
discharged.
Be prepared to give your employer the
required information as well. Carriers must
make detailed written reports within 30
days of an incident.
911
Call 911 to alert law authorities.
CHEMTREC (800) 424-9300
The Chemical Transportation Emergency
Center (CHEMTREC) in Washington
also has a 24-hour toll-free line (1-800-
424-9300). CHEMTREC was created to
provide emergency personnel with technical
information about the physical properties
of hazardous materials. The National
Response Center and CHEMTREC are in
close communication. If you call either one,
they will tell the other about the problem
when appropriate.
COVER 174 CONTENTS
Do not leave radioactive yellow-II or yellow-III labeled packages near people, animals or film
longer than shown in Figure 9-10: Radioactive Separation Table A.
Figure 9-10: Radioactive Separation Table A
Total
Transport
Index
Minimum distance in feet to
nearest undeveloped film
To people
or cargo
compartment
partitions
0­2
hours
2­4
hours
4­8
hours
8­12
hours
Over 12
hours
None 0 0 0 0 0
0.1 to 1.0 1 2 3 4 1
1.1 to 5.0 3 4 6 8 2
5.1 to 10.0 4 6 9 11 3
10.1 to 20.0 5 8 12 16 4
20.1 to 30.0 7 10 15 20 5
30.1 to 40.0 8 11 17 22 6
40.1 to 50.0 9 12 19 24
Classes of hazardous materials
Hazardous materials are categorized into nine major hazard classes and additional categories
for consumer commodities and combustible liquids. The classes of hazardous materials are
listed in Figure 9-11: Hazard Class Definitions Table B.
Figure 9-11: Hazard Class Definitions Table B
Class Class name Example
1 Explosives Ammunition,
Dynamite, Fireworks
2 Gases Propane, Oxygen,
Helium
3 Flammable Gasoline, Acetone
4 Flammable Solids Matches, Fuses
5 Oxidizers Ammonium Nitrate,
Hydrogen Peroxide
6 Poisons Pesticides, Arsenic
7 Radioactive Uranium, Plutonium
8 Corrosives Hydrochloric Acid,
Battery Fluid
9
Miscellaneous
Hazardous
Materials
Formaldehyde,
Asbestos
None
ORM-D (Other
Regulated
Material­
Domestic)
Hair Spray or Charcoal
None Combustible
Liquids Fuel Oils, Lighter Fluid
COVER 175 CONTENTS
Test your knowledge
1. If your placarded trailer has dual tires,
how often should you check the tires?
2. What is a safe haven?
3. How closely to the traveled part of the
roadway can you park with Division 1.2
or 1.3 materials?
4. How closely can you park to a bridge,
tunnel or building with the same load?
5. What type of fire extinguisher must
placarded vehicles carry?
6. You're hauling 100 pounds of Division
4.3 (dangerous when wet) material. Do
you need to stop before railroad-highway
crossings?
7. At a rest area you discover your
hazardous materials shipment is slowly
leaking from the vehicle. There's no
phone around. What should you do?
8. What is the Emergency Response Guide
(ERG)?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
subsections 9.6 and 9.7.
9.8 Hazardous
materials glossary
This glossary presents definitions of certain
terms used in this section. A complete
glossary of terms can be found in the federal
Hazardous Materials Rules (49 CFR 171.8).
You should have an up-to-date copy of these
rules for your reference.
NOTE: You will not be tested on this
glossary.
Bulk packaging­Packaging, other than
a vessel, or a barge, including a transport
vehicle or freight container, in which
hazardous materials are loaded with no
intermediate form of containment and
which has:
(1) A maximum capacity greater than 450
L (119 gallons) as a receptacle for a liquid;
(2) A maximum net mass greater than
400 kg (882 pounds) or a maximum
capacity greater than 450 L (119 gallons)
as a receptacle for a solid; or
(2) A water capacity greater than 454 kg
(1,000 pounds) as a receptacle for a gas
as defined in Sec. 173.115.
Cargo tank­A bulk packaging which:
(1) Is a tank intended primarily for the
carriage of liquids or gases and includes
appurtenances, reinforcements, fittings,
and closures (for "tank", see 49 CFR
178.345-1(c), 178.337-1, or 178.338-1, as
applicable);
(2) Is permanently attached to or
forms a part of a motor vehicle, or is
not permanently attached to a motor
vehicle but which, by reason of its size,
construction, or attachment to a motor
COVER 176 CONTENTS
vehicle is loaded or unloaded without
being removed from the motor vehicle;
and
(3) Is not fabricated under a specification
for cylinders, portable tanks, tank cars or
multi-unit tank car tanks.
Carrier A person who transports
passengers or property in commerce by rail
car, aircraft, motor vehicle or vessel.
Consignee The business or person to
whom a shipment is delivered.
Division A subdivision of a hazard class.
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
FMCSR The Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Regulations.
Freight container A reusable container
having a volume of 64 cubic feet or more,
designed and constructed to permit being
lifted with its contents intact and intended
primarily for containment of packages (in
unit form) during transportation.
Fuel tank A tank, other than a cargo
tank, used to transport flammable or
combustible liquid or compressed gas for the
purpose of supplying fuel for propulsion of
the transport vehicle to which it is attached,
or for the operation of other equipment on
the transport vehicle.
Gross weight or Gross mass­The
weight of a packaging plus the weight of its
contents.
Hazard class The category of hazard
assigned to a hazardous material under
the definitional criteria of Part 173 and
the provisions of the Sec. 172.101 Table. A
material may meet the defining criteria for
more than one hazard class, but is assigned
to only one hazard class.
Hazardous materials A substance or
material which has been determined by the
Secretary of Transportation to be capable
of posing an unreasonable risk to health,
safety, and property when transported
in commerce, and which has been so
designated. The term includes hazardous
substances, hazardous wastes, marine
pollutants, elevated temperature materials
and materials designated as hazardous in
the hazardous materials table of Sec. 172.101
and materials that meet the defining criteria
for hazard classes and divisions in Part 173,
subchapter c of this chapter.
Hazardous substance A material,
including its mixtures and solutions, that:
(1) Is listed in Appendix A to Sec. 172.101;
(2) Is in a quantity, in one package, which
equals or exceeds the reportable quantity
(RQ) listed in Appendix A to Sec. 172.101;
and
(3) When in a mixture or solution
(i) For radionuclides, conforms to
paragraph 7 of Appendix A to Sec.
172.101.
(ii) For other than radionuclides, is
in a concentration by weight which
equals or exceeds the concentration
corresponding to the RQ of the
material, as shown in the following
Figure 9-12: Hazardous Substance
Concentrations:
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
COVER 177 CONTENTS
Figure 9-12: Hazardous Substance
Concentrations
RQ Pounds
(kilograms)
Concentration by weight
PERCENT PPM
5,000 (2270) 10 100,000
1,000 (454) 2 20,000
100 (45.4) 0.2 2,000
10 (4.54) 0.02 200
1 (0.454) 0.002 20
This definition does not apply to petroleum
products that are lubricants or fuels (see 40
CFR 300.6).
Hazardous waste For the purposes of
this chapter, means any material that is
subject to the Hazardous Waste Manifest
Requirements of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency specified in 40 CFR
Part 262.
Intermediate bulk Container (IBC)­A
rigid or flexible portable packaging, other
than a cylinder or portable tank, which
is designed for mechanical handling.
Standards for IBCs manufactured in the
United States are set forth in subparts N
and O Sec. 178.
Limited quantity The maximum
amount of a hazardous material for which
there may be specific labeling or packaging
exception.
Marking The descriptive name,
identification number, instructions,
cautions, weight, specification or UN
marks or combinations thereof, required
by this subchapter on outer packagings of
hazardous materials.
Mixture A material composed of more
than one chemical compound or element.
Name of contents The proper shipping
name as specified in Sec. 172.101.
Non-bulk packaging A packaging which
has:
(1) A maximum capacity of 450 L (119
gallons) as a receptacle for a liquid;
(2) A maximum net mass less than
400 kg (882 pounds) and a maximum
capacity of 450 L (119 gallons) or less as a
receptacle for a solid;
(3) A water capacity greater than 454 kg
(1,000 pounds) or less as a receptacle for
a gas as defined in Sec. 173.115.
(4) Regardless of the definition of bulk
packaging, a mazimum net mass of
400 kg (882 pounds) or less for a bag
or box conforming to the applicable
requirements for specification
packagings, including the maximum net
mass limitations, provided in subpart L
of Part 178.
N.O.S. Not otherwise specified.
Outage or ullage The amount by which
a packaging falls short of being liquid full,
usually expressed in percent by volume.
Portable tank Bulk packaging (except
a cylinder having a water capacity of 1,000
pounds or less) designed primarily to be
loaded onto, or on, or temporarily attached
to a transport vehicle or ship and equipped
with skids, mountings or accessories to
facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical
means. It does not include a cargo tank,
tank car, multi-unit tank car tank or trailer
carrying 3AX, 3AAX or 3T cylinders.
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
COVER 178 CONTENTS
Proper shipping name­The name of the
hazardous materials shown in Roman print
(not italics) in Sec. 172.101.
P.s.i. or psi Pounds per square inch.
P.s.i.a. or psia Pounds per square inch
absolute.
Reportable quantity (RQ) The
quantity specified in Column 2 of the
Appendix to Sec. 172.101 for any material
identified in Column 1 of the Appendix.
PHMSA­The Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration, U.S.
Department of Transportation, Washington,
DC 20590.
Shipper's certification A statement
on a shipping paper, signed by the shipper,
saying he/she prepared the shipment
properly according to law. For example:
"This is to certify that the above named
materials are properly classified,
described, packaged, marked and
labeled, and are in proper condition
for transportation according to the
applicable regulations or the Department
of Transportation."
or
"I hereby declare that the contents of this
consignment are fully and accurately
described above the proper shipping
name and are classified, packed, marked
and labeled, and are in all respects in
proper condition for transport according
to applicable international and national
government regulations."
Shipping paper A shipping order,
bill of lading, manifest, or other shipping
document serving a similar purpose
prepared in accordance with subpart C of
Part 172.
Technical name A recognized chemical
name or microbiological name currently
used in scientific and technical handbooks,
journals, and texts.
Transport vehicle A cargo carrying
vehicle such as an automobile, van, tractor,
truck, semi-trailer, tank car, or rail car used
for the transportation of cargo by any mode.
Each cargo carrying body (trailer, rail car,
etc.) is a separate transport vehicle.
UN standard packaging A specification
packaging conforming to the standards in
the UN recommendations.
UN United Nations
­
­
­
­
­
­
­ ­
­
COVER 179 CONTENTS
SECTION 10: SCHOOL
BUSES
This section covers:
· Wisconsin License Requirements
· General School Bus Rules
· Danger Zones and Use of Mirrors
· Loading and Unloading
· Student Management
· Emergency Exit and Evacuation
· Railroad-Highway Grade Crossings
· Antilock Braking Systems
· Special Safety Considerations
Because state and local laws and regulations
regulate so much of school transportation
and school bus operations, many of the
procedures in this section may differ from
state to state. You should be thoroughly
familiar with all school bus procedures,
laws, regulations and local school district
procedures.
Wisconsin license
requirements
You must have a school bus ("S")
endorsement if you drive a vehicle (painted
school bus colors) transporting:
· Pupils to or from school, or points
designated by the school.
· Persons with disabilities or elderly
persons in connection with any
transportation assistance program.
See School Bus or Alternative Vehicle for
more information.
Qualifications and tests
To operate a school bus, drivers must have
a school bus ("S") endorsement. To operate
a school bus, which is a commercial motor
vehicle (CMV), drivers must also have a
commercial driver license (CDL) with a
passenger ("P") endorsement. Section 4
outlines the information you need to qualify
for a CDL with a passenger endorsement.
In addition, you will need to take a special
school bus knowledge test, highway signs
test and pass a skills test in a school bus.
Prepare for the CDL knowledge tests by
studying the information included in
Section 2 through Section 4 of this manual.
Prepare for the school bus knowledge test by
studying this section.
If you take the skills test in a school bus
designed to carry fewer than 16 passengers
(including the driver), you will be restricted
to driving a school bus of this size (non-
CMV).
Additional requirements
There are additional requirements for a
school bus endorsement. To qualify for the
endorsement, school bus drivers must:
· Be at least 18 years old. (If you are under
21 years of age, you will be restricted to
CDL intrastate operation only.
· Not have been convicted of reckless
driving, operating a motor vehicle while
under the influence of an intoxicant or
controlled substance or any felony on
the list of School Bus Disqualifications
online at wisconsindmv.gov.
· Have sufficient use of both hands and the
foot normally used to operate the foot
brake and accelerator safely.
COVER 180 CONTENTS
· Have at least 20/40 vision corrected
or uncorrected in each eye, have a
minimum of 70 degrees field of vision in
each eye and be able to identify traffic
signal colors.
· Be able to hear a forced whisper at five
feet with or without a hearing aid.
· Pass a special physical examination as
required by Wisconsin law or present the
Federal Medical Card.
· To retain the "S" endorsement, you must
pass a physical every 2 years and upon
renewal (every year if age 70 or older).
· At each renewal of the "S" endorsement,
or other time frames determined by
Wisconsin Statutes, school bus drivers
must be retested (if 70 or older, they
must be retested every 2 years).
General school bus rules
In addition to knowing and obeying general
traffic rules applicable to all buses and large
vehicles, school bus drivers must comply
with the following rules and safe driving
practices:
· Keep doors closed when moving, except
when crossing railroad tracks.
· Transport authorized passengers only.
· Keep aisles, stairwells, and steps clear of
book bags, band instruments, etc.
· Conduct a complete vehicle inspection
prior to each trip. See Vehicle Inspection
in Section 11M.
· Keep children out of the back row of
seats except when the bus is filled.
Sitting near the front of the bus provides
greater protection in rear end collisions.
· Seat students with special needs near the
driver.
· Keep students seated when the bus
is moving unless they are going to a
door before stopping or to their seat
immediately after loading.
· Prohibit smoking on the bus.
· Maintain a time schedule but not at the
expense of safety.
· Use approved routes and pickup or
discharge points.
· Follow approved routes except in an
emergency.
· NEVER leave the bus unattended with
the engine running and the keys in the
ignition.
· Wear the safety belt.
10.1 Danger zones
and use of mirrors
10.1.1 Danger zones
The danger zone is the area on all sides of the
bus where children are in the most danger of
being hit, either by another vehicle or their
own bus. The danger zones may extend as
much as 30 feet from the front bumper with
the first 10 feet being the most dangerous, 10
feet from the left and right sides of the bus
and 10 feet behind the rear bumper of the
school bus. In addition, the area to the left
of the bus is always considered dangerous
because of passing vehicles. Figure 10-1
illustrates these danger zones.
COVER 181 CONTENTS
Figure 10-1: The Danger Zones
10 feet 10 feet
10 feet Most Dangerous
10 feet Most Dangerous
Walking area
Danger from Passing Cars
Danger Zones
SCHOOL BUS
10.1.2 Correct mirror
adjustment
Proper adjustment and use of all mirrors is
vital to the safe operation of the school bus in
order to observe the danger zone around the
bus and look for students, traffic and other
objects in this area. You should always check
each mirror before operating the school
bus to obtain a maximum viewing area. If
necessary, have the mirrors adjusted.
10.1.3 Outside left and
right side flat mirrors
These mirrors are mounted at the left and
right front corners of the bus at the side
or front of the windshield. They are used
to monitor traffic, check clearances and
students on the sides and to the rear of the
bus. There is a blind spot immediately below
and in front of each mirror and directly
in back of the rear bumper. The blind spot
behind the bus extends 50 to 150 feet and
could extend up to 400 feet depending on
the length and width of the bus.
Ensure that the mirrors are properly
adjusted so you can see:
· 200 feet or 4 bus lengths behind the bus.
· Along the sides of the bus.
· The rear tires touching the ground.
Figure 10-2 shows how both the outside
left and right side flat mirrors should be
adjusted.
Figure 10-2: Left and Right Side Flat Mirrors
SCHOOL BUS
200 feet 200 feet
Blind spot can be 500­1500
May use in conjunction with the left and right
side convex mirrors to obtain desired visibility.
COVER 182 CONTENTS
10.1.4 Outside left and right
side convex mirrors
The convex mirrors are located below
the outside flat mirrors. They are used
to monitor the left and right sides at a
wide angle. They provide a view of traffic,
clearances and students at the side of the
bus. These mirrors present a view of people
and objects that does not accurately reflect
their size and distance from the bus.
You should position these mirrors to see:
· The entire side of the bus up to the
mirror mounts.
· Front of the rear tires touching the
ground.
· At least one traffic lane on either side of
the bus.
Figure 10-3 shows how both the outside left
and right side convex mirrors should be
adjusted.
Figure 10-3: Left and Right Side Convex
Mirrors
SCHOOL BUS
32 feet
32 feet
12 feet 12 feet
May use in conjunction with the left and right side
standard (flat) mirrors to obtain desired visibility.
10.1.5 Outside left and right
side crossover mirrors
These mirrors are mounted on both left and
right front corners of the bus. They are used
to see the front bumper "danger zone" area
directly in front of the bus that is not visible
by direct vision and to view the "danger
zone" area to the left side and right side of
the bus, including the service door and front
wheel areas. The mirror presents a view of
people and objects that does not accurately
reflect their size and distance from the bus.
The driver must ensure that these mirrors
are properly adjusted.
Ensure these mirrors are properly adjusted
so you can see:
· The entire area in front of the bus from
the front bumper at ground level to a
point where direct vision is possible.
Direct vision and mirror view vision
should overlap.
· The right and left front tires touching the
ground.
· The area from the front of the bus to the
service door.
These mirrors, along with the convex and
flat mirrors, should be viewed in a logical
sequence to ensure that a child or object is
not in any of the danger zones.
COVER 183 CONTENTS
Figure 10-4 illustrates how the left and right
side crossover mirrors should be adjusted.
Figure 10-4: Left and Right Side Crossover
Mirrors
SCHOOL BUS
SCHOOL BUS
10.1.6 Overhead inside
rearview mirror
This mirror is mounted directly above
the windshield on the driver's side area
of the bus. This mirror is used to monitor
passenger activity inside the bus. It may
provide limited visibility directly in back of
the bus if the bus is equipped with a glass-
bottomed rear emergency door.
There is a blind spot area directly behind
the driver's seat as well as a large blind spot
area that begins at the rear bumper and
could extend up to 400 feet or more behind
the bus. You must use the exterior side
mirrors to monitor traffic that approaches
and enters this area.
You should position the mirror to see:
· The top of the rear window in the top of
the mirror.
· All of the students, including the heads
of the students right behind you.
10.2 Loading and unloading
More students are killed while getting
on or off a school bus each year than are
killed as passengers inside of a school bus.
As a result, knowing what to do before,
during, and after loading or unloading
students is critical. This section will give
you procedures to help you avoid unsafe
conditions which could result in injuries
and fatalities during and after loading and
unloading students.
Routes, stops, pickup and discharge
points
Each school district establishes official
routes and official school bus stops. All
stops should be approved by the school
district prior to making the stop. You
should never change the location of a bus
stop without written approval from the
appropriate school district official.
Select pickup and discharge points carefully.
Report those sites that are dangerous to
local School Boards. Other drivers should be
able to see the bus in plenty of time.
Using flashing red warning lights
A school bus has no special right of way
privileges on highways except when picking
up or discharging students. When you stop,
you must use the flashing red warning lights
and the stop arm.
All vehicles must stop no closer than 20
feet to a stopped school bus with flashing
red warning lights. The only exception is
vehicles traveling in the opposite direction
on a divided highway. Do not use flashing
red warning lights where both sides of
the road have curb and sidewalk, unless
required by local ordinance.
COVER 184 CONTENTS
Operators of vehicles proceeding in the
opposite direction on a divided highway
are not required to stop for stopped school
buses displaying flashing red warning lights
(s.346.48(1)), Wisconsin Statutes.
School bus drivers are responsible for
reporting to appropriate law enforcement
agencies, incidents of drivers who do not
stop for a stopped school bus with flashing
red warning lights activated. Note time and
location, license number, color and type of
vehicle, weather and road conditions.
10.2.1 Approaching the stop
You must use extreme caution when
approaching a school bus stop. You are in
a very demanding situation when entering
these areas. It is critical that you understand
and follow all state and local laws and
regulations regarding approaching a school
bus stop. This includes the proper use of
mirrors, flashing amber and red warning
lamps, the moveable stop arm and when
equipped, the crossing control arm.
When approaching the stop, you
should:
· Approach cautiously at a slow rate of
speed.
· Look for pedestrians, traffic or other
objects before, during and after coming
to a stop.
· Continuously check all mirrors.
· Turn on flashing amber warning lights
at least 300 feet before stopping in a 45
mile per hour or greater speed zone or
at least 100 feet before stopping in a less
than 45 mile per hour speed zone.
· Determine if other drivers have observed
flashing amber warning lights and have
time to stop.
· Stop in the farthest right driving lane.
· Bring the bus to a full stop with the
front bumper at least 10 feet away from
students at the designated stop. This
forces students to walk to the bus so you
have a better view of their movements.
Extinguish the flashing amber warning
lights and turn on the flashing red
warning lights.
· Activate the stop arm only after the bus
has stopped and before opening the
door.
· Place the transmission in Park or Neutral
and apply the foot brake to prevent the
bus from accidently moving.
· Make a final check to see that all traffic
has stopped before completely opening
the door and signaling students to
approach.
10.2.2 Loading procedures
· Perform a safe stop as described in
subsection 10.2.1.
· Students should wait in a designated
location for the school bus, facing the
bus as it approaches.
· Students should board the bus only when
signaled by the driver.
· Monitor all mirrors continuously.
· Count the number of students at the bus
stop and be sure all board the bus. If
possible, know names of students at each
stop. If there is a student missing, ask
the other students where the student is.
COVER 185 CONTENTS
· Have the students board the bus slowly,
in single file, and use the handrail. The
dome light should be on while loading in
the dark.
· Wait until students are seated and facing
forward before moving the bus.
· Check all mirrors. Make certain no one is
running to catch the bus.
· If you cannot account for a student
outside, secure the bus, take the key, and
check around and underneath the bus.
· When all students are accounted for,
prepare to leave by:
 Checking all mirrors including the
crossover mirror(s).
 Closing the door to retract the stop
arm.
 Engaging the transmission.
 Turning off the flashing red warning
lights.
 Allowing congested traffic to
disperse.
 Check the crossover mirror(s) and
both outside rear view mirrors again.
· When it is safe, move the bus, enter the
traffic flow and continue the route.
NOTE: Do not use the flashing amber or
red warning lights when operating a school
bus to transport adults or when a school
bus is being used for non-school functions.
When the bus is used for these situations,
cover the words, "school bus" on the front
and rear of the bus.
WISCONSIN EXCEPTION: If
transporting children for any purpose,
school bus markings may remain uncovered
and flashing amber or red lights used
(s.346.48(2)(c), Wisconsin Statutes).
Without flashing warning lights
If you are loading or discharging students in
areas where flashing warning lights are not
required, follow these procedures:
· Activate the yellow hazard lights at least
100 feet before the stop.
· Check traffic and move over to the right
curb.
· Observe traffic carefully.
· Tell students to stand away from the
road when waiting to board and to move
away from the bus immediately after
they get off.
· Instruct students who must cross the
street to go to the cross walk and wait
until it is safe to proceed.
· When students are safely aboard or
unloaded, turn off the hazard warning
lights, check traffic and use the left turn
signal to re-enter traffic. Teach students
these procedures. Work with parents to
promote safety.
Loading procedures at school
The loading procedure is essentially the
same wherever you load students, but there
are slight differences at some locations.
When students are loading at the school
campus, you should:
· Arrive before students are in the loading
area at dismissal time.
· Drive slowly in and near the school
loading area.
· Park in designated loading area.
COVER 186 CONTENTS
· Turn off the ignition switch.
· Remove the key if you are leaving the
driver's compartment and set the
parking brake.
· Position yourself to supervise loading as
required or recommended by your state
or local regulations.
· After loading is complete, enter the
traffic flow and continue the route.
· Do not pass other buses, remain in line.
· Maintain proper following distances, etc.
10.2.3 Unloading
procedures on the route
Any school bus driver approaching the
front or rear of a stopped school bus that is
displaying flashing red warning lights shall
also display its flashing red warning lights
and stop arm while stopped.
· Perform a safe stop at designated
unloading areas as described in
subsection 10.2.1.
· Have the students remain seated until
told to exit.
· Check traffic and all mirrors, especially
the right outside mirror.
· Open the door and count the students as
they leave the bus.
· After counting the students exiting the
bus, partially close the door so other
students do not enter or exit.
· Students living on the left side of the
road should wait 10­12 feet in front of
the bus.
· Those living on the right should move
away from the bus immediately.
However, they should not move toward
the rear of the bus.
· Recheck traffic and all mirrors,
especially the left outside mirror.
· After determining it is safe to cross, give
a clear hand signal to students while
keeping a lookout for traffic. Choose a
predetermined signal such as sounding
the horn to warn students if there is
danger. Choose a signal that will not
be misunderstood by the other drivers.
Continuously monitor all mirrors.
· Recount all students who have been
discharged. (Those crossing the road and
on the right side of the bus.)
· If you cannot account for a student who
has been discharged, secure the bus,
take the key and check around and
underneath the bus.
· When all students are accounted for,
prepare to leave by:
 Checking all mirrors, including the
crossover mirror(s).
 Closing the door to retract the stop
arm.
 Engaging the transmission.
 Turning off the flashing red warning
lights.
 Allowing congested traffic to
disperse.
 Check crossover mirror(s) and both
outside rear view mirrors again.
· When it is safe, move the bus into the
flow of traffic and continue the route.
NOTE: If you have missed a student's
unloading stop, do not back up. Be sure to
follow local procedures.
COVER 187 CONTENTS
Additional procedures for students
who must cross the roadway
You should understand what students are to
do when exiting a school bus and crossing
the street in front of the bus. In addition,
you should also understand that students
might not always do what they are supposed
to do.
If a student or students must cross
the roadway, they should follow these
procedures:
· Walk approximately 10 feet away from
the side of the school bus to a position
where you can see them.
· Walk to a location at least 10 feet in front
of the right corner of the bumper, but
still remaining away from the front of
the school bus.
· Stop at the right edge of the roadway. You
should be able to see the student's feet.
· Upon your signal, the students should:
 Cross far enough in front of the
school bus to be in your view.
 Look for traffic in both directions,
making sure the roadway is clear.
 Proceed across the roadway,
continuing to look in all directions.
· The school bus driver should:
 Instruct students about the hazards
that are part of riding the bus or
crossing the road.
 Instruct them how to protect
themselves in a crash and the proper
evacuation procedures.
 Remind children to continually
follow safety procedures.
 Inform them of expected, acceptable
behavior.
 Handle disciplinary problems as they
occur.
10.2.4 Unloading
procedures at school
State and local laws and regulations
regarding unloading students at schools,
particularly in situations where such
activities take place in the school parking
lot or other location that is off the traveled
roadway, are often different than unloading
along a school bus route. It is important that
the school bus driver understands and obeys
state and local laws and regulations. The
following procedures are meant to be general
guidelines when unloading at the school:
· Drive slowly in and near the school
unloading area.
· Park in designated area.
· Never back a bus on school grounds.
· Come to a complete stop.
· Shift to park or neutral and apply foot
brake.
· Secure the bus by:
 Turning off the ignition switch,
engage the parking brake.
 Removing the key if you are leaving
the driver's compartment.
· Have the students remain seated until
they are told to exit.
· Position yourself to supervise unloading
as required or recommended by your
state or local regulations.
· Have students exit in an orderly fashion.
· Observe the students as they step from
the bus to see that they all promptly
move away from the unloading area.
COVER 188 CONTENTS
· Walk through the bus and check for
hiding/sleeping students and items left
by students.
· Check all mirrors. Make certain no
students are returning to the bus.
· If you cannot account for a student
outside the bus and the bus is secure,
check around and underneath the bus.
· When all students are accounted for,
prepare to leave by:
 Closing the door.
 Fastening your safety belt.
 Starting the engine.
 Engaging the transmission.
 Releasing the parking brake.
 Turning on your left turn signal.
 Checking all mirrors again.
 Allowing congested traffic to
disperse.
· When it is safe, pull away from the
unloading area.
10.2.5 Special dangers of
loading and unloading
Dropped or forgotten objects
Always focus on students as they approach
the bus and watch for any who disappear
from sight.
Students may drop an object near the bus
during loading and unloading. Stopping to
pick up the object, or returning to pick it up,
may cause the student to disappear from the
driver's sight at a very dangerous moment.
Students should be told to leave any
dropped object and move to a point of
safety out of the danger zones and attempt
to get the driver's attention before trying to
retrieve the object.
Handrail hang-ups
Students have been injured or killed when
clothing, accessories or even parts of their
body get caught in the handrail or door
as they exited the bus. You should closely
observe all students exiting the bus to
confirm they are in a safe location prior to
moving the bus.
10.2.6 Post-trip inspection
When your route or school activity trip is
finished, you should conduct a post-trip
inspection of the bus by walking through and
around the bus looking for the following:
· Articles left on the bus.
· Sleeping students.
· Open windows and doors.
· Mechanical/operational problems with
the bus, with special attention to items
that are unique to school buses­mirror
systems, flashing warning lamps and
stop signal arms.
· Damage or vandalism.
Any problems or special situations should
be reported immediately to your supervisor
or school authorities.
Transporting persons with
disabilities
Transporting persons with special needs
or physical disabilities requires patience
and understanding. Follow your company
guidelines. Some general rules are:
· When raising or lowering persons on the
power ramp, hold onto the wheel chair.
· Secure the wheel first and then the
occupant.
· Know an individual's special health or
behavioral problems.
· Practice vehicle evacuation.
COVER 189 CONTENTS
Establish an understanding with the
parents, guardians or other caregivers on
their involvement in loading and unloading
the person at home. Work with the parents
and school officials to determine the
location for pick up and discharge. Do not
leave your bus unattended to assist a person
with special needs unless the engine is shut
off, parking brake is set and the keys are
removed from the ignition.
10.3 Emergency exit
and evacuation
An emergency situation can happen to
anyone, anytime, anywhere. It could be a
crash, a stalled school bus on a railroad-
highway crossing or in a high-speed
intersection, an electrical fire in the engine
compartment, a medical emergency to a
student on the school bus, etc. Knowing
what to do in an emergency before, during
and after an evacuation can mean the
difference between life and death.
10.3.1 Planning for emergencies
Determine need to evacuate bus
The first and most important consideration
is for you to recognize hazard. If time
permits, school bus drivers should contact
their dispatcher to explain the situation
before making a decision to evacuate the
school bus.
As a general rule, student safety and control
is best maintained by keeping students
on the bus during and emergency and/or
impending crisis situation, if doing so does
not expose them to unnecessary risk or
injury. Remember, the decision to evacuate
the bus must be a timely one.
A decision to evacuate should include
consideration of the following conditions:
· Is there a fire or danger of fire?
· Is there a smell of raw or leaking fuel?
· Is there a chance the bus could be hit by
other vehicles?
· Is the bus in the path of a sighted tornado
or rising waters?
· Are there downed power lines?
· Would removing students expose them
to speeding traffic, severe weather, or a
dangerous environment such as downed
power lines?
· Would moving students complicate
injuries such as neck and back injuries
and fractures?
· Is there a hazardous spill involved?
Sometimes, it may be safer to remain on
the bus and not come in contact with the
material.
Mandatory evacuations
The driver must evacuate the bus when:
· The bus is on fire or there is a threat of a
fire.
· The bus is stalled on or adjacent to a
railroad highway crossing.
· The position of the bus may change and
increase the danger.
· There is an imminent danger of collision.
· There is a need to quickly evacuate
because of a hazardous materials spill.
COVER 190 CONTENTS
10.3.2 Evacuation procedures
Be prepared and plan ahead
Each school bus driver should practice
evacuation procedures early in the school
year and conduct periodic reviews of the
procedure. Organize a safety patrol on each
bus to assist in school bus evacuation and
other emergencies.
Use the school grounds to conduct an
evacuation drill using the front door only. To
practice a drill using the service door and
emergency exit, find an area where there is
no traffic.
When possible, assign two responsible,
older student assistants to each emergency
exit. Teach them how to assist the other
students off the bus. Assign another
student assistant to lead the students to a
safe place after evacuation. However, you
must recognize that there may not be older,
responsible students on the bus at the time
of an emergency. Therefore, emergency
evacuation procedures must be explained to
all students. This includes knowing how to
operate of the various emergency exits, and
the importance of listening to and following
all instructions given by you.
Some tips to determine a safe place:
· A safe place for the students will be at
least 100 feet off the road in the direction
of oncoming traffic. This will keep them
from being hit by debris if another
vehicle collides with the bus.
· Lead the students upwind of the bus if
fire is present.
· Lead the students as far away from
railroad tracks as possible and in the
direction of any oncoming train.
· Lead the students upwind of the bus
at least 300 feet if there is a risk from
spilled hazardous materials.
· If the bus is in the direct path of a
sighted tornado and evacuation is
ordered, escort the students to a nearby
ditch or culvert if shelter in a building
is not readily available. Direct them to
lie face down with their hands covering
their head. They should be far enough
away so the bus cannot topple on them.
Avoid areas that are subject to flash
floods.
General procedures
Determine if evacuation is in the best
interest of safety.
· Determine the best type of evacuation:
 Front, rear or side door evacuation,
or some combination of doors.
 Roof or window evacuation.
· Secure the bus by:
 Placing the transmission in Park,
or if there is no shift point, put it in
Neutral.
 Setting parking brakes.
 Shutting off engine.
 Removing ignition key.
 Activating hazard warning lights.
· If time allows, notify your dispatch office
of the evacuation location, conditions,
and type of assistance needed.
· Dangle radio microphone or telephone
out of the driver's window for later use, if
operable.
· If no radio, or radio is inoperable,
dispatch a passing motorist or area
resident to call for help. As a last resort,
COVER 191 CONTENTS
dispatch two older, responsible students
to go for help.
· Order the evacuation.
· Evacuate the students from the bus.
· Direct a student assistant to lead the
students to the nearest safe place.
· Walk through the bus to ensure no
students remain on the bus. Retrieve
emergency equipment.
· Join the waiting students. Account for all
students and check for their safety.
· Protect the scene. Set out emergency
warning devices as necessary and
appropriate.
· Prepare information for emergency
responders.
NOTE: Do not move a student you believe
may have suffered a neck or spinal injury
unless his or her life is in immediate danger.
Special procedures must be used to move
neck and/or spinal injury victims to prevent
further injury.
Types of evacuation
In an evacuation, calm the students and give
them instructions. If the driver is unable to
conduct the evacuation because of injury,
the school patrol members should take over.
· The front door evacuation procedure is:
 Students in the left front seat exit
first followed by those in the right
front seat.
 Continue alternating from the
front to the rear of the bus until all
students are off.
· The rear door evacuation procedure is:
 Assign two patrol members or older
children to exit first and help the
others out of the door.
 Students in the left rear seat exit first
followed by those in the right rear
seat.
 Continue alternating until all
students are off the bus.
 If possible, use both doors for
evacuation. Start at both doors
alternating as above. Have the
students assemble in one location
immediately after the evacuation. Do
not allow students to cross the road
or re-enter the bus. Always account
for all of the students.
Handling emergencies
School bus drivers should prepare for
unexpected situations. Carry emergency
cards listing telephone numbers for the
sheriff, local police, school officials,
ambulance service and garage.
If possible, do not leave the children
unattended. Give the card to two
responsible children who will go for help.
Select and train several students for this
responsibility. Two way radios and cellular
phones are valuable in emergency situations.
Following a crash or breakdown, the school
bus driver must decide whether to evacuate
the students. They may be safer on the bus.
If evacuation is necessary, select a safe place
and supervise the unloading.
It is extremely important that the bus is
visible in the event of a breakdown or crash.
To maximize your visibility:
· Move off roadway if possible.
COVER 192 CONTENTS
· Activate the hazard lights and after dark,
turn on the parking lights, clearance
lights and strobe light (if equipped).
· Set out traffic warning devices.
Then account for all of your students and
administer necessary first aid. Report
school bus crashes immediately to a local
law enforcement agency.
Fire
In the event of a fire from a collision or
an equipment malfunction, follow this
procedure:
· Evacuate the students.
· Set out traffic warning devices.
 Send two responsible children for
help with the emergency cards.
10.4 Railroad-
highway crossings
NOTE: In Wisconsin, all school buses,
loaded or empty, must stop at railroad
crossings unless the tracks are posted
"exempt" or "abandoned."
10.4.1 Types of crossings
Passive crossings
This type of crossing does not have any
type of traffic control device. You must
stop at these crossings and follow proper
procedures. However, the decision to
proceed rests entirely in your hands.
Passive crossings require you to recognize
the crossing, search for any train using the
tracks and decide if there is sufficient clear
space to cross safely. Passive crossings have
yellow circular advance warning signs,
pavement markings and crossbucks to assist
you in recognizing a crossing.
Active crossings
This type of crossing has a traffic control
device installed at the crossing to regulate
traffic at the crossing. These active devices
can include flashing red lights, with or
without bells and flashing red lights with
bells and gates.
10.4.2 Warning signs
and devices
Advance warning signs
The round, black-on-yellow warning sign is
placed ahead of a public railroad-highway
crossing. The advance warning sign tells you
to slow down, look and listen for the train,
and be prepared to stop at the tracks if a
train is coming. See Figure 10.5.
Figure 10-5: Round Yellow Warning Sign
R
R
Pavement markings
Pavement markings mean the same as the
advance warning sign. They consist of an
"X" with the letters "RR" and a no-passing
marking on two-lane roads.
There is also a no passing zone sign on two-
lane roads. There may be a white stop line
painted on the pavement before the railroad
tracks. The front of the school bus must
remain behind this line while stopped at the
crossing. See Figure 10.6.
COVER 193 CONTENTS
Figure 10-6: Pavement Markings
Crossbuck signs
This sign marks the crossing. It requires
you to yield the right of way to the train.
If there is no white line painted on the
pavement, you must stop the bus before the
crossbuck sign. When the road crosses over
more than one set of tracks, a sign below
the crossbuck indicates the number of
tracks. See Figure 10-7.
Figure 10-7: Multiple Tracks
CRO
SSIN
G
RAIL
ROAD
TRACKS
3
YIELD
Flashing red light signals
At many highway-rail grade crossings, the
crossbuck sign has flashing red lights and
bells. When the lights begin to flash, stop!
A train is approaching. You are required to
yield the right of way to the train. If there is
more than one track, make sure all tracks
are clear before crossing. See Figure 10-8.
Gates
Many railroad-highway crossings have gates
with flashing red lights and bells. Stop when
the lights begin to flash and before the gate
lowers across the road lane. Remain stopped
until the gates go up and the lights have
stopped flashing. Proceed when it is safe. If
the gate stays down after the train passes,
do not drive around the gate. Instead,
contact your dispatcher. See Figure 10-8.
Figure 10-8: Gates/Lights
CRO
SSIN
G
RAIL
ROAD
TRACKS
3
COVER 194 CONTENTS
10.4.3 Recommended
procedures
Each state has laws and regulations
governing how school buses must operate at
railroad-highway crossings. It is important
for you to understand and obey these state
laws and regulations. In general, school
buses must stop at all crossings and ensure
it is safe before proceeding across the
tracks. The specific procedures required in
each state vary.
A school bus is one of the safest vehicles on
the highway. However, a school bus does
not have the slightest edge when involved
in a crash with a train. Because of a train's
size and weight it cannot stop quickly. An
emergency escape route does not exist for
a train. You can prevent school bus/train
crashes by following these recommended
procedures.
Railroad crossings
All school buses, loaded or empty, must
stop at railroad crossings unless the tracks
are posted "exempt" or "abandoned."
The procedure for stopping at railroad
crossings is:
· Approaching the crossing:
 Check traffic before slowing.
 Slow down, including shifting to a
lower gear in a manual transmission
bus, and test your brakes.
 Activate yellow hazard lights
approximately 200 feet but at least
100 feet before the crossing. Make
sure intentions are known.
· At the crossing:
 Stop in the farthest right driving lane,
no closer than 15 feet and no farther
than 50 feet from the nearest rail
where you have the best view of the
tracks. Whenever an auxiliary lane
is provided for stopping at a railroad,
operators of vehicles required to stop
shall use such lanes for stopping
s.346.45(2), Wisconsin Statutes.
 Press down on and hold the service
brakes to prevent the bus from
moving.
 Turn off all radios and noisy
equipment and silence the
passengers.
 Completely open the service door and
driver's side window. Look and listen
carefully for an approaching train.
 Look left, then right.
· Crossing the track:
 Check the crossing signals again
before proceeding. Never rely on
railroad mechanical flashing lights.
 Check mirrors for traffic behind the
bus.
 Cross the tracks in a low gear. Do not
change gears while crossing.
 At a multiple track crossing, stop only
before the first set of tracks. When
you are sure no train is approaching
on any track, proceed across all of
the tracks until you have completely
cleared them. Only stop between
tracks when there is more than 15
feet between the front and rear of the
bus and any tracks.
 The service door shall remain open
until the front wheels of the bus have
cleared the first set of tracks for each
required stop. The service door shall
be closed before shifting.
COVER 195 CONTENTS
 If the gate comes down afer you have
started across, drive through it even
if it means you will break the gate.
10.4.4 Special situations
Bus stalls or is trapped on the tracks
If your bus stalls or is trapped on the tracks,
get everyone out of the bus and off the
tracks immediately! Move everyone far away
from the bus at an angle, which is both away
from the tracks and toward the train.
Police officer at the crossing
If a police officer is at the crossing, obey
directions. If there is no police officer, and
you believe the signal is malfunctioning, call
your dispatcher to report the situation and
ask for instructions on how to proceed.
Obstructed view of tracks
Plan your route so it provides maximum sight
distance at highway-rail grade crossings. Do
not attempt to cross the tracks unless you
can see far enough down the track to know
for certain that no trains are approaching.
Passive crossings are those that do not
have any type of traffic control device. Be
especially careful at passive crossings. Even if
there are active railroad signals that indicate
the tracks are clear, you must look and listen
to be sure it is safe to proceed.
Containment or storage areas
If it won't fit, don't commit! Know the length
of your bus and the size of the containment
area at highway-rail crossings on the school
bus route, as well as any crossing you
encounter in the course of a school activity
trip. When approaching a crossing with a
signal or stop sign on the opposite side, pay
attention to the amount of room there. Be
certain the bus has enough containment or
storage area to completely clear the railroad
tracks on the other side if there is a need
to stop. As a general rule, add 15 feet to
the length of the school bus to determine
an acceptable amount of containment or
storage area.
10.5 Student management
10.5.1 Don't deal with
on-bus problems when
loading and unloading
Getting children to accept part of the
responsibility for their safety on the bus is
a challenging task school bus drivers face.
Establishing a positive relationship between
the driver and the passengers helps gain this
cooperation.
In order to get students to and from school
safely and on time, you need to be able to
concentrate on the driving task.
Loading and unloading requires all your
concentration. Don't take your eyes off what
is happening outside the bus.
If there is a behavior problem on the bus,
wait until the students unloading are
safely off the bus and have moved away. If
necessary, pull the bus over to handle the
problem.
10.5.2 Handling
serious problems
Tips on handling serious problems:
· Follow your school's procedures for
discipline or refusal of the right to ride
the bus.
· Stop the bus. Park in a safe location off
the road (perhaps a parking lot or a
driveway.)
COVER 196 CONTENTS
· Secure the bus. Take the ignition key
with you if you leave your seat.
· Stand up and speak respectfully to
the offender or offenders. Speak in a
courteous manner but with a firm voice.
Remind the offender of the expected
behavior. Do not show anger, but do
show that you mean business.
· If a change of seating is needed, request
that the student move to a seat near you.
· Never put a student off the bus except at
school or at his or her designated school
bus stop. If you feel that the offense
is serious enough that you cannot
safely drive the bus, call for a school
administrator or the police to come
and remove the student if appropriate.
Always follow your state or local
procedures for requesting assistance.
Maintaining proper discipline on the
school bus reduces distractions and allows
the driver to give full attention to driving.
Students' behavior must not distract the
driver or interfere with safety or other
passengers.
Local school boards develop the rules
for student behavior. Copies of the rules
should be distributed to students and
their parents. Rule enforcement is a
responsibility shared by the school bus
driver, school officials and parents.
10.6 Antilock braking systems
10.6.1 Vehicles required to have
Antilock Braking Systems (ABS)
The Department of Transportation requires
that antilock braking systems be on:
· Air brakes vehicles, (trucks, buses,
trailers and converter dollies) built on or
after March 1, 1998.
· Hydraulically braked trucks and buses
with a gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or more built on or after
March 1, 1999.
Many buses built before these dates have
been voluntarily equipped with ABS.
Your school bus will have a yellow ABS
malfunction lamp on the instrument panel
if it is equipped with ABS.
10.6.2 How ABS helps you
When you brake hard on slippery surfaces
in a vehicle without ABS, the vehicle's
wheels may lock up. When your steering
wheels lock up, you lose steering control.
When your other wheels lock up, you may
skid or even spin the vehicle.
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up and
maintain control. You may or may not be
able to stop faster with ABS, but you should
be able to steer around an obstacle while
braking, and avoid skids caused by over-
braking.
10.6.3 Braking with ABS
When you drive a vehicle with ABS, you
should brake as you always have. In other
words:
· Use only the braking force necessary to
stop safely and stay in control.
· Brake the same way, regardless of
whether you have ABS on your bus.
COVER 197 CONTENTS
However, in emergency braking, do not
pump the brakes on a bus with ABS.
· As you slow down, monitor your bus and
back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so)
to stay in control.
10.6.4 Braking if ABS
is not working
Without ABS, you still have normal brake
functions. Drive and brake as you always
have.
Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction
lamps to tell you if something is not
working. The yellow ABS malfunction lamp
is on the bus's instrument panel.
As a system check on newer vehicles, the
malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for
a bulb check and then goes out quickly. On
older systems, the lamp could stay on until
you are driving over 5 mph.
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or
goes on once you are under way, you may
have lost ABS control at one or more wheels.
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you
still have regular brakes. Drive normally,
but get the system serviced soon.
10.6.5 Safety reminders
· ABS will not allow you to drive faster,
follow more closely or drive less
carefully.
· ABS will not prevent power or turning
skids­ABS should prevent brake-
induced skids but not those caused by
spinning the drive wheels or going too
fast in a turn.
· ABS will not necessarily shorten stopping
distance. ABS will help maintain vehicle
control but not always shorten stopping
distance.
· ABS will not increase or decrease
ultimate stopping power. ABS is an
"add-on" to your normal brakes, not a
replacement for them.
· ABS will not change the way you
normally brake. Under normal brake
conditions, your vehicle will stop as it
always stops. ABS only comes into play
when a wheel would normally have
locked up because of over-braking.
· ABS will not compensate for bad brakes
or poor brake maintenance.
· Remember: The best vehicle safety
feature is still a safe driver.
· Remember: Drive so you never need to
use your ABS.
· Remember: If you need it, ABS could
help to prevent a serious crash.
10.7 Special safety
considerations
10.7.1 Strobe lights
The flashing white strobe light increases
visibility in all types of weather. Its use does
not require motorists to stop. It is required
equipment on buses initially registered
on or after Oct. 1, 1998; optional on buses
registered before that date.
If your bus is so equipped, the overhead
strobe light should be used whenever you
transport pupils or have limited visibility.
In all instances, understand and obey
your state or local regulations concerning
the use of these lights. See Wisconsin
Administrative Code, Chapter Trans 300 for
additional information.
COVER 198 CONTENTS
10.7.2 Driving in high winds
Strong winds affect the handling of a school
bus! The side of a school bus acts like a sail
on a sailboat. Strong winds can push the
school bus sideways. They can even move
the school bus off the road or, in extreme
conditions, tip it over.
If you are caught in strong winds:
· Keep a strong grip on the steering wheel.
Try to anticipate gusts.
· You should slow down to lessen the effect
of the wind, or pull off the roadway and
wait.
· Contact your dispatcher to get more
information on how to proceed.
10.7.3 Backing
Backing a school bus is strongly
discouraged. You should back your bus
only when you have no other safe way to
move the vehicle. You should never back a
school bus when students are outside the
bus. Backing is dangerous and increases
your risk of a collision. If you have no choice
and you must back your bus, follow these
procedures:
· Post a lookout, preferably inside the
school bus, looking out the rear window.
The purpose of the lookout is to warn
you about obstacles, approaching
persons and other vehicles. The lookout
should not give directions on how to
back the bus.
· Signal for quiet on the bus.
· Constantly check all mirrors and rear
windows.
· Activate hazard warning lights.
· Back slowly and smoothly.
· If no lookout is available:
 Set the parking brake.
 Turn off the motor and take the keys
with you.
 Walk to the rear of the bus to
determine whether the way is clear.
· If you must back up at a student pick-up
point, be sure to pick up students before
backing and watch for late comers at all
times.
· Be sure all students are in the bus before
backing.
If you must back up at a student drop-off
point, be sure to unload students after
backing. When discharging students, follow
these general guidelines before backing onto
the highway or backing into a driveway:
· Drive past the driveway to allow enough
space to maneuver.
· Check traffic carefully. Allow traffic to
pass.
· Use hazard warning lights.
· Back into drive.
· Discharge students after backing.
· Check traffic and yield to oncoming
vehicles.
· Proceed out of the drive.
Turning around
Like backing, turning around in a driveway
is done only when necessary. Plan routes to
reduce the need for this maneuver.
If you must turn around in a driveway, there
are two methods. The driver is responsible
for making the choice after evaluating the
conditions. When pulling into a driveway:
· Signal the turn.
· Check traffic and yield to oncoming
vehicles.
COVER 199 CONTENTS
· Pull into the drive until the bus is
straight.
· Pick up students before backing.
· Post a lookout.
· Check traffic carefully.
· Use hazard warning lights.
· Back slowly and smoothly.
· Turn off hazard warning lights and
proceed.
10.7.4 Tail swing
A school bus can have up to a three-foot
tail swing. You need to check your mirrors
before and during any turning movements
to monitor the tail swing.
Test your knowledge
1. Define the danger zone. How far does the
danger zone extend around the bus?
2. What should you be able to see if
the outside flat mirrors are adjusted
properly? The outside convex mirrors?
The crossover mirrors?
3. You are loading students along the
route. When should you activate your
alternately flashing warning lamps?
4. You are unloading students along your
route. Where should students walk to
after exiting the bus?
5. After unloading at school, why should
you walk through the bus?
6. What position should students be in front
of the bus before they cross the roadway?
7. Under what conditions must you
evacuate the bus?
8. How far from the nearest rail should you
stop at a highway-rail crossing?
9. What is a passive highway-rail crossing?
Why should you be extra cautious at this
type of crossing?
10.How should you use your brakes if your
vehicle is equipped with antilock brakes
(ABS)?
These questions may be on your test. If
you are unable to answer them all, re-read
Section 10.
Vehicle inspection
for school bus
Vehicle inspection
Each driver is required to make, and may
be held accountable for, a vehicle inspection
of the bus to determine whether or not the
vehicle is safe to operate on the highway.
Review Section 11M of this manual for
detailed information on vehicle inspection.
Section 11M.3 provides specific school bus
inspection procedures.
You, as a driver, will be evaluated on the
inspection of the vehicle as part of the
examination for original or renewal school
bus ("S") endorsement. You may use the
"Vehicle Inspection Memory Aid" in this
manual as a guide when performing the
vehicle inspection.
NOTE: CDL third party (non-DMV)
examiners are authorized to administer
CDL skills tests.
NOTE: Studded snow tires are allowed
on school buses between November 15th
and April 1st. s.347.45(2)(c)2, Wisconsin
Statutes.
COVER 200 CONTENTS
PART THREE
Section 11M: Vehicle inspection test
Section 12M: Basic vehicle control skills test
Section 13: On road driving test
Part three is for drivers who need to present
a skills test.
SECTION 11M: VEHICLE
INSPECTION TEST
This section covers:
· Internal Inspections (All Vehicles)
· Passenger Vehicle Inspections
· School Bus Vehicle Inspections
· Lights Operations Check (All Vehicles)
· External Inspections (All Vehicles)
· Combination Vehicle Inspections
Federal and jurisdictional laws require
that CDL drivers inspect their vehicle to
determine if it is safe to drive. A vehicle
inspection will help you find problems or
defects that can cause a breakdown or, even
worse, a crash. It is important to inspect all
vehicle components for proper working order.
During your CDL Vehicle Inspection test,
your inspection will focus on the safety
critical items for the operation of your
vehicle. During this inspection, you must
show you have the knowledge to determine
the vehicle is safe to drive. During the test,
you will only be required to inspect one
vehicle axle, however, you should be prepared
to perform the same inspection, described in
section (11M.5.2) on all of the vehicle axles.
The vehicle inspection used to evaluate your
basic knowledge does not cover all the federal
inspection guidelines. It is your responsibility
to be knowledgeable of the Federal Motor
Carrier Safety Regulations.
For safety purposes, you should use wheel
chocks during the Vehicle Inspection test.
You will have to walk around and enter/exit
the vehicle to conduct the inspection. When
exiting the vehicle, you must set the parking
brake(s) and place the vehicle in neutral.
When entering/exiting the vehicle, you
must safely exit/enter by facing the vehicle
and maintaining three (3) points of contact
at all times (when entering/ exiting a bus,
safely enter/exit by facing forward and
maintaining a firm grasp on the handrail).
You are only required to inspect the
items on the CDL Vehicle Inspection
checklist. You may use the checklist
provided in this section for your test and
check off items as you have completed them,
but NO additional markings or writing may
be placed on this list prior to the test.
You MUST name, point to and/or touch
and fully explain to the examiner WHAT
you are inspecting each safety critical item
for. If you do not, you will not get credit
for the item(s). You will NOT have to crawl
under the vehicle. Any vehicle that has
components marked or labeled, other than
by the manufacturer, CANNOT be used for
the Vehicle Inspection test.
Failure to Follow Instructions or
Unsafe Act. Failure to follow examiner
instructions for completing the test as
directed may result in an automatic failure,
and the test may be terminated by the
examiner. Always follow the examiner's
instructions and directions. If you do
not understand the instructions, ask the
examiner for clarification.
COVER 201 CONTENTS
Committing an "unsafe act" (e.g., forgetting
to set the parking brake), may result in an
automatic failure for an unsafe act, and the
test may be terminated by the examiner.
Safety of the driver, the examiner and the
testing area is of the highest priority. Always
think SAFETY.
11M.1 Internal Inspection
(All Vehicles)
Study the following vehicle parts for the
vehicle you will be using during the CDL
Vehicle Inspection test. You should be able
to identify each part and tell the examiner
what you are looking for or inspecting.
11M.1.1­In-Vehicle/
Engine Start
Lighting Indicators
Description: Dashboard indicator lights
for signals, flashers, headlight high beam;
Anti-lock Braking System (ABS); and Diesel
Exhaust Fluid (DEF)/Diesel Particulate
Filter (DPF).
Why Inspect: Indicates which functions
are active or warns of problem vehicle
components.
Inspection: Each of the following items must
be inspected. Inspect to make sure the dash
indicators work when the vehicle starts and
when corresponding lights are turned on
including:
· Left turn signal indicator.
· Right turn signal indicator.
· Four-way emergency indicator.
· High beam headlight indicator.
· ABS indicator on dashboard; (and for
combination vehicles only, the rear
driver's side trailer ABS light should turn
on then off), if equipped.
· DEF indicator, if equipped.
NOTE: Operational inspection of actual
turn signals, four-way indicators and high
beam functions must be done separately
during the lights operation inspection
described in Section 11M.4.
Emergency Equipment
Description: Required emergency
equipment.
Why Inspect: Emergency equipment must
be available and in usable condition.
Inspection:
· Inspect for spare electrical fuses (if
used) or identify circuit breakers.
· Inspect for a properly charged and
secured fire extinguisher.
· Inspect for three (3) red reflective
triangles, six (6) flares or three (3) liquid
burning flares.
· Inspect for spare electrical fuses (if
used) or identify circuit breakers.
NOTE: If the vehicle is not equipped with
electrical fuses, you must mention this to
the examiner and identify that the vehicle
operates on circuit breakers.
Windshield and Traffic Monitoring
Devices
Description: Windshield, mirrors and other
monitoring devices, such as cameras.
Why Inspect: Cracks, obstructions, stickers,
or dirt in the driver's viewing area can
cause the driver to lose sight of changes in
road conditions or other traffic around the
vehicle.
Inspection:
· Inspect that the windshield is clean with
no obstructions except for an inspection
sticker. There can be no damage, such as
cracks or flaws to the glass.
COVER 202 CONTENTS
· Inspect that mirrors are clean and
adjusted properly from the inside, when
present. OR If equipped, inspect that
rear and side view monitoring devices
or cameras are clean and in working
condition. Devices should be viewable
from the inside and the video display
must be operable and adjusted for
viewing.
Wipers/Washers
Description: Windshield wipers and
washers.
Why Inspect: Wipers improve visibility
during rain and snow. Worn blades reduce
visibility. Washers assist in keeping the
windshield clean.
Inspection:
· Inspect that wiper arms and blades are
secure, not damaged, and demonstrate
wipers operate smoothly by turning
them on and off.
· Inspect for windshield washer fluid and
demonstrate windshield washers operate
correctly by activating the washers.
Heater/Defroster
Description: Heats cab or passenger
compartment and prevents frost or
condensation from forming on windshield.
Why Inspect: The defroster improves
visibility, especially during cold weather.
Inspection:
· Identify, describe and demonstrate the
heater(s) and defroster(s) work correctly
by operating the controls.
Horn(s)
Description: Air and/or electrical horns
used for warning other roadway users
(e.g., cars, motorcyclists, bicyclists and
pedestrians).
Why Inspect: The horn is a device that must
function properly in order to warn other
roadway users of your presence and avoid
potential collisions.
Inspection:
· Inspect that air horn and/or electric
horn work.
Parking and Trailer Brake Check
Description: Keeps vehicle from moving or
rolling when parked.
Why Inspect: The parking brake(s) must
function when a vehicle is parked, especially
when on a grade. A vehicle allowed to roll
could cause damage or injury to other
roadway users or property.
Inspection: You will be required to
demonstrate the parking brake check (and
trailer parking brake check, if equipped).
This procedure is designed to determine that
the parking brake(s) are working correctly,
and they keep the vehicle from moving.
· Parking Brake: With the parking brake
engaged (trailer brakes released on
combination vehicles, if applicable),
remove foot from service brake and
inspect that the parking brake will hold
the vehicle by gently pulling forward
with the parking brake on.
· Trailer Brake: With the parking brake
released and the trailer parking brake
engaged (combination vehicles only),
remove foot from service brake and
inspect that the trailer parking brake
will hold the vehicle by gently pulling
forward with the trailer parking brake
on. Also assists in checking the coupling
connection with the trailer.
COVER 203 CONTENTS
Service Brake Check
Description: Procedure to be followed to
inspect the application of air, hydraulic or
electric service brakes.
Why Inspect: This procedure is designed to
make certain that air, hydraulic or electric
service brakes are operating correctly for
normal operation.
Inspection: You will be required to
demonstrate the application of air,
hydraulic or electric service brakes. This
procedure is designed to determine that
the brakes are working correctly, and that
the vehicle does not pull to one side or the
other at a low speed.
· Pull forward at 5 mph, apply the service
(foot) brake and come to a complete stop.
Inspect to see that the vehicle does not
pull to either side and stops when the
service brake is applied. If the vehicle
pulls to either side or does not stop well,
the brakes may not be working correctly.
11M.1.2­Air Brake or Hydraulic
Brake Check (based on
type of brake system)
Air Brake Check (Air Brake Equipped
Vehicles Only)
Description: Procedures to be followed in
inspecting air brake systems.
Why Inspect: Air brake safety devices vary.
This procedure is designed to make certain
that safety devices are operating correctly
as air pressure drops from "normal" to
"low air" conditions. Loss of air pressure
will cause the emergency brakes to activate
causing an abrupt and uncontrolled stop.
INSPECTION: Failure to explain and
demonstrate (perform) all four (4)
parts of the air brake check correctly
will result in an automatic failure of
the CDL Vehicle Inspection test.
The proper procedures for inspecting the air
brake system are as follows:
1. Air Gauge and Governor Cutout Check.
Chock the wheels, if required, start the
vehicle and inspect that the air gauge
is working. Builds the air pressure
to governor cutout and identify the
range of activation. This will occur at
approximately 120­140 psi OR level
specified by the manufacturer. In addition,
when a governor cutout takes place, an
audible discharge of air may be heard from
the air braking system. You should not rely
on the audible discharge alone. You should
discuss the vehicles air gauges and the
readout during the inspection.
2. Air Leakage Rate Test. Shut off the engine,
return the key to the "on" or "battery
charge" position, release the parking brake
(all vehicles), and the tractor protection
valve (combination vehicle). Fully apply the
foot brake. Once the air gauge is stabilized
after the initial drop from applying the
brakes, hold the foot brake for one (1)
minute. Inspect the air gauge to see if the
air pressure drops no more than three (3)
pounds in one (1) minute (single vehicle
or trailer without airbrakes) or four (4)
pounds in one (1) minute (combination
vehicle) after initial stabilization.
3. Air Warning Device(s) Test. Without re-
starting the engine, make sure the key or
electrical power is in the "on" or "battery
charge" position. Begin fanning off the
air pressure by applying and releasing the
foot brake and identify the level the low air
warning devices (buzzer, light, and flag)
activates. The low air warning devices
(buzzer, light, and flag) should activate
before air pressure drops below 55 psi.
COVER 204 CONTENTS
4. Emergency Brake(s) Test. Continue to fan
off the air pressure. The parking brake
(or emergency brake) valve should close
(pop out) between 20 psi and 45 psi (no
less than 20 psi and no more than 45 psi)
OR level specified by the manufacturer.
· On air operated trailers, the tractor
protection valve and trailer parking
brake (or emergency brake) valve
should close (pop out) at the same
time or prior to the valve for the truck/
tractor/bus.
· You will need to identify the level
specified by the manufacturer for
the vehicle you are testing in. If the
vehicle's valves are not designed to
pop out, you will need to listen for the
sound of air discharging from the air
system, which indicates the parking
(or emergency) brakes have been
applied. If the vehicle is equipped with
a primary and secondary air brake
system, you will need to explain that
there is a backup system and that the
valve(s) will not pop out due to loss of
pressure in only one of the systems.
NOTE: You will need to explain the specific
procedures specified by the manufacturer
for the vehicle you are testing in. It is your
responsibility to know and describe to
the examiner the vehicle manufacturer's
specifications for air systems.
OR
Hydraulic Brake Check (Hydraulic
Brake Equipped Vehicles Only)
Description: Procedure to be followed to
inspect hydraulic brakes. Types of hydraulic
brake systems and inspection procedures
will vary.
Why Inspect: Damaged hydraulic hoses,
leaks in the braking system or low hydraulic
fluid will result in a partial or total loss
of the braking system that may result in
increased stopping distances or a crash.
Inspection: Failure to explain and
demonstrate the hydraulic brake check
correctly will result in an automatic failure
of the CDL Vehicle Inspection test. This
check is designed to see that the hydraulic
brakes operate correctly. Use the following
hydraulic brake check steps based on your
vehicle's system specifications:
· Inspect that indicators and warning
systems are functioning, as specified by
the manufacturer, if equipped.
· With the transmission placed in "park",
identify the normal height of the
brake pedal and inspect brake pedal
pressure [i.e., pump the brake pedal
three (3) times, and then hold it down
for five (5) seconds], or as specified
by the manufacturer. The brake pedal
should not move (depress) after initial
application and should be firm and have
a sufficient amount of reserve for brake
pedal application.
· Inspect that the hydraulic power assist
system(s), if equipped, are functioning,
as specified by the manufacturer.
NOTE: Hydraulic brake systems vary. Your
system may require the ignition to be in the
"on" position and/or the engine running.
You will need to explain and demonstrate
to the examiner the procedures for your
vehicle as specified by the manufacturer.
COVER 205 CONTENTS
11M.2 Passenger and
School Bus Only
Passenger Entry and Lift
Description: Bus door(s) used for normal
entry or exit. Passenger lift used for
wheelchair accessibility.
Why Inspect: All passengers must be able to
enter and exit safely.
Inspection:
· Inspect that entry door(s) are not
damaged, operate smoothly and close
securely from the inside.
· Inspect that handrails are secure and,
if equipped, that the step light(s) are
working.
· Inspect that the entry steps are clear,
and the tread is not loose, or worn.
· If equipped with a passenger lift, inspect
for leaking, damaged or missing parts,
and explain how the lift should be
inspected for correct operation.
· If equipped, lift must be fully retracted
and latched securely.
Emergency Exits
Description: Bus doors, roof hatches, or
push-out windows used for emergency
evacuation.
Why Inspect: Emergency exits must be
operable in order to provide an escape for
passengers during a crash or emergency.
Inspection:
· Inspect that all emergency exits
are labeled, not damaged, operate
smoothly, and close securely from the
inside. Demonstrate that at least one
(1) emergency exit operates smoothly,
closes securely, and is not damaged.
Confirm that the exit and warnings work
properly. Point out and describe how all
other emergency exits operate.
· Inspect that release handles can be
operated properly both from inside and
outside the vehicle.
· With the key in the "on" or "charged"
position, inspect that emergency exit
warning devices are working.
Passenger Seating
Description: Passenger vehicle seats and
frames.
Why Inspect: Seats must be safe for
passengers to sit in.
Inspection:
· Inspect that there are no broken seat
frames and inspect that seat frames are
firmly attached to the floor.
· Inspect that seat cushions are attached
securely to the seat frames.
Passenger Monitoring Devices
Description: Mirrors and monitoring
devices, such as cameras, for observing and
monitoring passengers or students.
Why Inspect: Internal (passenger) and
external (fender, cross-over and other)
mirrors or monitoring devices for seeing
and observing passengers or students help
the driver to safely observe and monitor
passengers/students during driving, loading
and unloading. Passenger/school bus vehicle
drivers must be able to see boarding and
discharging passengers/students.
Inspection:
· Inspect that all internal and external
passenger mirrors and mirror brackets
are not bent and are mounted securely
with no missing parts.
COVER 206 CONTENTS
· Inspect all internal and external
passenger mirrors for proper adjustment
and that they are clean.
· If equipped, inspect that passenger
monitoring devices or cameras are clean
and viewable from the inside and the
video display is operable and adjusted
for viewing.
· Inspect student crossover mirrors
(school bus only).
11M.3 School Bus Only
Student Lights (Front and Back)
Description: Strobe light (if equipped),
alternately flashing amber lights and
alternately flashing red lights on school
buses.
Why Inspect: Student lights allow the driver
of a school bus to communicate presence
and intentions to stop/resume student
loading and unloading with other traffic.
Inspection: The following student lights
must be inspected, and the operation
demonstrated, on both the front and back of
the vehicle.
· Inspect that strobe light (if equipped) is
operational and is not broken. Inspect
that the strobe light indicator on the
dash is operational.
· Inspect that alternately flashing amber
lights (if equipped), on both front and
rear of vehicle, are operational and is not
broken. Inspect that the flashing amber
light indicator on the dash is operational.
· Inspect that alternately flashing red
lights, on both front and rear of vehicle,
are operational and is not broken.
Inspect that the flashing red light
indicator on the dash is operational.
Stop Arm(s) and Safety Arm
Description: The stop arm and safety arm
on school buses that operate when student
loading and unloading lights are activated.
Why Inspect: Stop Arm­Warns other
drivers a school bus is stopping or is
stopped. Safety Arm­Forces school
students to cross well (e.g., 10 feet) away
from the front of the school bus in the
drivers view.
Inspection: The following school bus safety
items must be inspected and the operation
of, must be described and demonstrated.
· Inspect the stop arm(s), if equipped,
are securely mounted to the vehicle
frame and there are no loose, broken,
or damaged parts. Inspect the stop arm
extends fully when operated, stop arm
lights are operational and that the stop
arm indicator on the dash is operational.
· Inspect that safety arm, if equipped, is
securely mounted to the vehicle frame
and there are no loose, broken, or
damaged parts. Inspect that the safety
arm functions properly in conjunction
with the stop arm, it extends fully.
First Aid Emergency and Body Fluid
Kits
Description: Required emergency
equipment (including emergency first aid kit
and body fluid cleanup kit) for a school bus.
Why Inspect: Emergency equipment must
be available and in usable condition.
Inspection:
· Inspect that emergency first aid kit is
present and the seal has not been broken
which may indicate missing items.
· Inspect that body fluid cleanup kit is
present and the seal has not been broken
which may indicate missing items.
COVER 207 CONTENTS
11M.4 Lights Operations
Check (All Vehicles)
Lights Operations Check
Description: Headlights, high-beam lights,
turn signals, 4-way flashers, clearance
lights, taillights, and brake lights on the
front, sides and rear of a commercial motor
vehicle and trailer (combination only).
Why Inspect: Lights allow the driver of a
commercial vehicle to see and be seen and
to communicate with other traffic.
Inspection:
· Inspect that all lights on the front, sides
and rear of the vehicle operate and
illuminate when corresponding lights
are turned on, including the left and
right turn signals, 4-way flashers, low
beam headlights, high beam headlights,
clearance or marker lights, taillights and
brake lights. Inspect that brake lights
come "on" when brakes are applied and
turn "off" when brakes are released.
NOTE: on a combination vehicle, you need
only inspect the rear of the trailer.
NOTE: The operation of all external
lights must be inspected from outside the
vehicle, including lights activated by an
automated light check system. You may ask
the examiner to assist you in inspecting
the external operation of the lights. You
will need to direct the examiner to the
front, sides and rear of the vehicle or trailer
(combination only), as you conduct the
inspection. You are responsible for telling
the examiner exactly which lights you
would like them to inspect as you activate
the lights from inside the vehicle. You will
need to roll the window down and speak
loud enough for the examiner to hear. If you
forget or leave out a specific light, you will
not get credit.
11M.5 External Inspection
(All Vehicles)
11M.5.1­Front of Vehicle/
Engine Area (Engine Off)
Lenses
Description: Light lenses or covers on the
front of the vehicle/tractor.
Why Inspect: Light lenses or covers must be
clean and free of damage for lights to work
properly.
Inspection:
· Inspect that light lenses or covers are the
proper color, clean, not broken and not
missing.
Critical Fluid Levels
Description: Engine oil for engine
lubrication; coolant for cooling the engine;
steering fluid for assisting wheel action to
the front wheels; and brake fluid for vehicle
braking (hydraulic brakes only).
Why Inspect: Proper fluid levels ensure that
engine, cooling, steering and brake systems
(hydraulic brakes only) operate correctly
and extends the life of the engine and these
systems.
Inspection: With the engine off, indicate
that fluids would be inspected for proper
levels including the:
· engine oil;
· cooling system/coolant;
· power steering fluid; and
· brake fluid (hydraulic brakes only).
COVER 208 CONTENTS
If applicable, indicate where to inspect the
fluid level and where the dipstick(s) or sight
glass(es) are located. Identify that you would
inspect that the level is between the add and
the full marks for each item.
CAUTION: If the engine is hot,
do not remove the radiator cap.
Fluid and Air Leaks
Description: Fluid leaks from engine and
other vehicle systems; and air leaks, if
applicable.
Why Inspect: Fluid loss could indicate
component failure in areas where levels
might not be readily inspected (e.g.,
transmission or fuel systems). Air leaks
could indicate component failure in areas
that may not be readily inspected (e.g., air
compressor and other air components).
Inspection:
· Look for puddles on the ground.
· Look for dripping fluids around and on
underside of engine and transmission.
· Inspect hoses and air lines, if applicable,
for condition and leaks.
Steering System
Description: Mechanisms that transform
steering column action into wheel turning
action.
Why Inspect: Worn, cracked, loose or
broken steering parts could result in loss of
steering. Movement in the linkage can cause
the vehicle to wander or experience other
serious control problems.
Inspection:
· Inspect that the power steering box is
securely mounted and not leaking.
· Inspect that all steering hoses and
connections are not cracked, worn, or
leaking.
· Inspect that visible connecting links,
arms, and rods from the steering box to
the wheel are not worn or cracked and
that joints and sockets are not worn or
loose.
· Inspect there are no missing nuts,
bolts, or cotter keys/pins in the steering
connections.
11M.5.2 Axle Components/
Steering Axle
Tires
Description: Tire/wheel assemblies in
contact with the pavement.
Why Inspect: Underinflation increases
the chance of blowout from excessive heat
buildup due to increased flexing of the
tire. Low tread depth increases the effect
of hydroplaning, reduces traction and
increases stopping distance.
Overinflation increases the chances of
damage to the tire from curbs and potholes
and loss of traction due to less tread in
contact with the road. Cuts and bulges may
cause tire failure, blowouts, and sudden loss
of control.
Inspection: The following items must be
inspected:
· Tire inflation: Inspect for proper
inflation using a tire gauge. Make sure
all valve stems are accessible.
· Tire condition: Inspect for cuts and
damage that expose body plies to the tire
in the tread and sidewall. Make sure that
valve caps are not missing, and valve
stems are not damaged or broken. Look
for bumps and bulges in the sidewall and
mismatched diameters in dual tires.
COVER 209 CONTENTS
· Tread depth: Inspect for minimum tread
depth with a tread depth gauge on all
major tread grooves containing wear
bars (4/32 on steering axle tires, 2/32 on
all other tires).
NOTE: You will not get credit if you simply
kick the tires or use a mallet to inspect for
proper inflation. You must mention the use
of a tire gauge.
NOTE: If the tires are equipped with an
automatic tire inflation system (ATIS) or
tire pressure monitoring system (TPMS)
that has hoses connected to the tire valve
stems, you need only mention that tire
pressure is monitored and adjusted by an
automatic system and inspect that it is
working properly.
Rims
Description: The metal rims or wheels on
which tires are mounted.
Why Inspect: Damaged rims can result in
loss of a tire from the rim, loss of a wheel
from an axle, loss of air pressure in a tire,
a wheel rolling off a rim due to damage to
flange, or split rim. A damaged wheel can
result in loss of vehicle control, leading
to a crash. Wheels and rims should be
inspected for conditions that could result in
a complete or partial wheel separation or air
loss in the tire.
Inspection:
· Inspect for damaged, cracked or bent
rims. Rims cannot have welding
repairs. Inspect for rust trails that may
indicate rim is loose on a wedge wheel, if
applicable.
· Inspect bolt holes to make sure they are
not elongated (out of round).
Lug Nuts
Description: Holds wheel on axle.
Why Inspect: Loose or missing lug nuts
could result in the loss of a wheel and lead
to a crash.
Inspection:
· Inspect that all lug nuts are present.
· Inspect that lug nuts are not loose and
there are no signs of rust trails or shiny
threads that may show looseness.
· Inspect that there are no bent, broken or
missing studs.
Springs/Mounts, U-Bolts, Air Bags
and Shocks
Description: Leaf or coil springs for
dampening wheel vibration forces created
by rolling over road surface. Air bags that
accompany springs or serve as the primary
suspension system. Gas or hydraulic devices
(shocks) that cushion vehicle suspension
and stabilize the vehicle. U-shaped bolts
and mounting bolts used for attaching
suspension assembly to the axle.
Why Inspect: Damaged or missing leaf
springs or coils may lead to loss of control
or rollover if the vehicle falls on the frame
or on a tire. Shifted springs may strike
a tire causing a blowout or interference
with steering. Damaged air bags or shocks
can affect vehicle handling and stopping
distances. Loose or broken U-bolts may lead
to loss of vehicle control or rollover.
Inspection: The following items must be
inspected, where visible and accessible, on
each axle:
· Inspect for missing, shifted, cracked,
or broken leaf springs and inspect that
spring mounts are not cracked, broken
or missing any parts.
COVER 210 CONTENTS
· Inspect for broken or distorted coil
springs and inspect that mounts are not
cracked, broken or have any missing
parts.
· Inspect that the air ride suspension is
secure, not damaged and not leaking (if
equipped).
· Inspect that shock absorbers are
secure, not damaged and not leaking (if
equipped).
· Inspect that the vehicle is sitting level
(front to rear and side to side).
· Inspect that U-bolts and mounting bolts
are not broken, missing or loose.
NOTE: Inform the examiner if the
suspension components are not visible or
accessible, on vehicles such as transit or
motor coach buses, and inspect that the
vehicle is sitting level (front to rear and side
to side) and note that a leaning vehicle may
indicate a suspension problem.
Brake Lines/Hoses/Leaks
Description: Carries air or hydraulic fluid to
wheel brake assembly.
Why Inspect: Loss of hydraulic fluid may
lead to loss of brake power and response.
Loss of air pressure may cause wheel
lockup.
Inspection:
· Inspect that hoses or lines can supply air
or hydraulic fluid to the brakes and are
not leaking.
· Inspect for cracked, worn or frayed
hoses or lines.
· Inspect that all hose or line couplings
and fittings are secure.
NOTE: If electric brakes, inspect that
electric lines are secure, and casing is not
worn or cracked.
Brake Contaminates
Description: Contamination, such as grease,
oil, etc., that can affect braking performance
when slowing or stopping the vehicle.
Why Inspect: Contaminates on the brakes
can cause a reduction in braking friction
which may lead to a crash. Contaminates
can also create a fire hazard.
Inspection:
· If accessible, inspect for contaminants
such as grease, oil, etc., on the brake
lining or pads and the brake drum or
disc that can affect braking capabilities.
11M.5.3 Side of Vehicle
Lenses and Reflectors
Description: Light lenses or covers and
reflectors on the sides of the vehicle and
trailer (combination only).
Why Inspect: Light lenses or covers must be
free of damage for lights to work properly.
Reflectors allow the driver of a commercial
vehicle to be seen and to communicate
presence with other traffic.
Inspection:
· Inspect that light lenses or covers on
the sides of the vehicle and trailer
(combination only) are the proper color,
clean, not broken or missing.
· Inspect that reflectors on the sides of the
vehicle and trailer (combination only)
are the proper color, clean, not broken or
missing.
COVER 211 CONTENTS
Traffic Monitoring Devices
Description: Side view mirrors for rear
view of traffic to the sides and behind (all
vehicles). Other monitoring devices, such
as cameras, may be utilized with mirrors or
instead of mirrors.
Why Inspect: Mirrors or other monitoring
devices provide visibility to the sides and
rear of the vehicle. The driver must be able
to see other traffic, especially in blind areas.
Inspection:
· Inspect that mirror(s) are clean and not
cracked and mirror brackets are not
bent and are mounted securely with no
missing parts.
· If equipped, rear and side view
monitoring devices or cameras must be
clean to view from the inside.
Battery
Description: Batteries that supply electrical
current for vehicle functions or serve as a
partial or primary source for vehicle power.
Why Inspect: Damage to the batteries,
electrical system or electric motor can cause
vehicle breakdowns or electrical shortage
leading to a fire onboard the vehicle.
Inspection: Wherever located:
· Inspect that batteries are secure,
if visible.
· Inspect that all connections are tight
and should not show signs of excessive
corrosion, if visible.
· Inspect all electrical system cables and
lines are secure and not cracked or worn.
· Inspect that the battery box, cover or
door is secure, if applicable.
NOTE: Inform the examiner if the
batteries are not visible or accessible. If
they are not, you should describe what you
are inspecting.
Fuel Tank/DEF Tank
Description: A container that holds fuel.
Why Inspect: Leaks are a fire hazard and
can cause driving hazards to other traffic.
Fuel on pavement can be very slippery.
Inspection:
· Inspect that fuel tank, including Diesel
Exhaust Fluid (DEF) tank, if equipped,
is securely mounted, the cap is tight, and
there are no leaks from the tank or line.
Frame(s)
Description: Structural members for
supporting vehicle body or trailer body.
Why Inspect: Loose or cracked frame
members may reduce vehicle stability, cause
handling and cornering problems (e.g.,
wandering, possible rollover) resulting in
total loss of vehicle control. Cracks, breaks
or holes in the cargo area can result in
possible loss of cargo.
Inspection:
· Inspect for cracks, broken welds, holes
or other damage to the frame members,
including the trailer, if applicable.
· Inspect for cracks, breaks or holes in the
cargo area or floor, including the trailer,
if applicable.
· Inspect that trailer tandem release lever
and pins are secure, if applicable.
11M.5.4 Rear of
Vehicle or Trailer
Lenses and Reflectors
Description: Light lenses or covers and
reflectors on rear of vehicle or trailer
(combination only).
Why Inspect: Light lenses or covers must be
free of damage for lights to work properly.
COVER 212 CONTENTS
Reflectors allow the driver of a commercial
vehicle to be seen and to communicate
presence with other traffic.
Inspection:
· Inspect that light lenses or covers are the
proper color, clean, not broken and not
missing.
· Inspect that reflectors are the proper
color, clean, not broken and not missing.
NOTE: on a combination vehicle, you need
only inspect the rear of the trailer.
11M.6 Combination Vehicles
11M.6.1 Combination
Vehicles Only
Air and Electric Lines/Connectors
Description: Carry air and electricity from
power unit to trailer.
Why Inspect: Air Brakes­Loss of air to
the trailer will result in a partial or total
loss of braking to the towed unit. A low air
condition will cause sudden application of
the trailer's spring brakes, which may result
in loss of control and lead to a crash.
Electric Brakes­Loss of electrical
connection to the trailer will result in total
loss of braking and control to the towed unit
and can lead to a crash.
Electric Lines­Damaged lines may result in
loss of the vehicle's ability to communicate
its maneuvers to other drivers (no turn, or
brake lights). Not being seen by other traffic
at night is a serious traffic hazard and can
lead to a crash.
Inspection:
· Inspect that air and electric connectors
on the power unit and trailer are seated
and sealed, free of damage and locked
into place.
· Inspect that air hoses and electrical lines
are not cut, cracked, chafed, spliced,
taped or worn (steel braid/electrical
conductor must not show through).
Listen for air leaks (air brake systems
only).
· Inspect that electrical lines and air lines
(if equipped) are not tangled, crimped
or pinched, or dragging against vehicle
parts or the ground.
NOTE: You must inspect the connections
on both the power unit and trailer to receive
credit.
For the remainder of this section (11M.6.1),
you will need to study the type of coupling
system your vehicle is equipped with­that
you will be using for your Vehicle
Inspection test:
· Fifth Wheel Combination, or
· Pintle Hook Combination, or
· All Other Types of Combinations.
FOR FIFTH WHEEL COMBINATIONS
ONLY
Fifth Wheel Skid Plate
Description: Plate on which the trailer rests
and secures the trailer kingpin.
Why Inspect: A faulty or damaged
fifth wheel skid plate and an improper
connection between the tractor and the
trailer can result in handling problems,
rollover, or separation of the tractor and
trailer leading to a crash.
Inspection:
· Inspect that the fifth wheel skid plate is
securely mounted to the vehicle by the
fifth wheel platform.
· Inspect for cracks, breaks or excessive
wear.
COVER 213 CONTENTS
· Inspect for proper lubrication, if
applicable.
Kingpin, Apron & Gap
Description: Pin that attaches the semi-
trailer to tractor (kingpin) and the metal
plate attached to the kingpin that provides
the surface for resting the trailer on the fifth
wheel (apron).
Why Inspect: Wear or damage to the
kingpin can result in handling problems,
rollover, or separation of the tractor and
trailer leading to a crash.
Inspection:
· Inspect that the kingpin is in place and
not bent, damaged or worn.
· Inspect that the visible part of the apron
is not bent, cracked, or broken.
· Inspect that the trailer is lying flat on
the fifth wheel skid plate and there is no
space between the apron and fifth wheel
(no gap).
· Inspect for proper lubrication, if
applicable.
OR
FOR PINTLE HOOK COMBINATIONS
ONLY
Pintle Hook
Description: Tow hitch or receiving coupling
which the trailer drawbar ring/eye locks
into.
Why Inspect: A faulty or damaged pintle
hook and an improper connection between
the power unit and the trailer can result in
handling problems, rollover, or separation of
the power unit and trailer leading to a crash.
Inspection:
· Inspect that the pintle hook is securely
mounted to the vehicle frame.
· Inspect for loose or missing parts
including mounting bolts, nuts, pins,
brackets and clamps.
· Inspect for cracks, breaks or excessive
wear.
Trailer Drawbar Ring & Tongue
Description: Trailer drawbar ring or eye
attached to the front of the trailer tongue
that secures into the pintle hook for
coupling. The trailer tongue that extends
from the trailer's main body frame to allow
for coupling and turning.
Why Inspect: Wear, damage, cracks or
improper welds in the drawbar ring and
trailer tongue may result in loss of the
trailer leading to a crash.
Inspection:
· Inspect that the drawbar ring or eye is
not bent or twisted.
· Inspect that the drawbar ring or eye is
secured to the trailer tongue and there
are no loose or missing bolts, broken
welds, or cracks.
· Inspect that the drawbar ring or eye is
not worn.
· Inspect the trailer tongue for dents,
twists, cracks, and broken welds and
that the trailer tongue can support the
weight of the load. If extendable, inspect
that bolts, locking pins and cotter pins
are in place.
OR
ALL OTHER TYPES OF
COMBINATIONS
NOTE: Coupling systems vary. If you have
another type of coupling system, you will
need to describe to the examiner how it
works and what you are inspecting.
COVER 214 CONTENTS
Tow Hitch
Description: Tow or receiver hitch and
trailer ball, which the trailer coupler rests
on.
Why Inspect: A faulty or damaged tow
hitch or other mechanism and an improper
connection between the power unit and
the trailer can result in handling problems,
rollover, or separation of the power unit and
trailer leading to a crash.
Inspection:
· Inspect that the tow hitch or other
mechanism is securely mounted to the
vehicle frame. Inspect sway bar/control,
if equipped.
· Inspect for loose or missing parts
including mounting bolts, nuts, pins,
brackets and clamps, including the
trailer ball or other mechanism.
· Inspect for cracks, breaks or excessive
wear.
Trailer Coupler & Tongue
Description: Trailer coupler attached to
the front of the trailer tongue that latches
to the trailer hitch and trailer ball. The
trailer tongue that extends from the trailer's
main body frame to allow for coupling and
turning.
Why Inspect: Wear, damage, cracks or
improper welds in the trailer coupler and
trailer tongue may result in loss of the
trailer, leading to a crash.
Inspection:
· Inspect that the trailer coupler is not
bent or twisted.
· Inspect that the trailer coupler is secured
to the trailer tongue and there are no
loose or missing bolts, broken welds, or
cracks.
· Inspect that the trailer coupler is not
worn.
· Inspect the trailer tongue for dents,
twists, cracks, and broken welds and
that the trailer tongue can support the
weight of the load. If extendable, inspect
that bolts, locking pins and cotter pins
are in place.
Locking and Safety Devices
Description: Locking connection and safety
devices that keep the trailer locked into
place.
Why Inspect: The trailer could uncouple
during travel if the locking mechanisms are
not secured. Safety devices help to keep the
locking mechanism in place and provide
assistance should the connection fail.
Inspection: Fifth Wheel Coupling Systems
Only
· Look into fifth wheel gap and inspect
that locking jaws or lever are fully
secured around the kingpin and inspect
for play between kingpin and locking
jaws/lever.
· Inspect that the release arm is in the
engaged position and the safety latch or
lock (if equipped) is in place.
· Inspect the sliding fifth wheel locking
pins (if equipped) for damage and the
pins are fully engaged.
OR
Inspection: All Other Coupling Systems
· Inspect the locking mechanism or latch
for missing or broken parts and make
COVER 215 CONTENTS
sure the pintle or hitch release lever or
latch is locked in place and secure.
· Inspect that safety pins and cotter pins
are in place and not missing, if present.
· Inspect that safety cables or chains are
secure, crossed, and free of kinks and
excessive slack, if present. Breakaway
cables must be engaged.
11M.6.2 Trailers Only
Landing Gear & Clearance
Description: Supports front end of trailer
when trailer is not coupled to a truck or
tractor.
Why Inspect: Landing gear must be raised
properly so that it will not strike the
ground during travel and must clear the
back of the power unit while turning. Its
handle must be secured to the vehicle so
it will not move and strike other traffic.
Any damage to landing gear supports may
result in the trailer tipping or falling over
when disconnected.
Inspection:
· Inspect that the landing gear is fully
raised, has no missing parts, the crank
handle is secure, and the support frame
and landing pads are not damaged.
· If power operated, inspect for air or
hydraulic leaks.
· If tractor semi-trailer, inspect that the
fifth wheel is positioned properly so that
the tractor frame will clear the landing
gear during turns (fixed or sliding fifth
wheel).
Reflective Tape
Description: Reflective tape on the side and
rear of the trailer, if required.
Why Inspect: Reflective tape on a trailer
allows the driver of a commercial vehicle to
be seen and to communicate presence with
other traffic.
Inspection:
· Inspect that reflector tape on the sides
and rear of the trailer are present and
affixed securely to the vehicle.
NOTE: Reflective tape is only required
for trailers. Some jurisdictional laws may
require for school buses.
Basic Control Skills Test
Remember, the Vehicle Inspection test
must be passed before you can proceed to
the Basic Control Skills test (covered in the
next section).
COVER 216 CONTENTS
Class A Checklist
Tractor Semi-Trailer or Truck & Trailer or Bus & Trailer
In-Vehicle/Engine Start
*air or *hydraulic
brake check
parking & trailer
brake check
service brake check
lighting indicators
emergency
equipment
windshield & traffic
monitoring devices
wipers & washers
heater & defroster
horn(s)
Lights Operations Check
all external lights
Front of Vehicle/Engine Area
lenses
fluid levels
fluid & air leaks
steering systems
Steering Axle
tires
rims
lug nuts
brake contaminates
springs/mounts & u-bolts & air bags & shocks
brake lines or hoses & leaks
Side of Vehicle
lenses & reflectors
traffic monitoring
devices
battery
fuel tank/DEF tank
frame(s) & tandem
release
Combination Vehicles Only
air & electric lines & connectors
fifth wheel skid plate or pintle hook
or tow hitch
kingpin & apron & gap or drawbar ring
& tongue or coupler & tongue
locking & safety devices
Trailer Only
landing gear & clearance
reflective tape
Rear of Trailer
lenses & reflectors
* Automatic failure if not performed correctly
You are only required to inspect the items on the CDL Vehicle Inspection checklist.
You may use this checklist for your test and check off items as you have completed them, NO additional
markings or writing may be placed on this list. You MUST name, point to and/or touch and fully
explain what you are inspecting each safety critical item for. If you do not do so, you will not get credit
for the item(s).
Passenger and
School Bus Only
passenger entry
& lift
emergency exits
passenger seating
passenger
monitoring devices
School Bus Only
student lights
(front & back)
stop arm(s) &
safety arm
first aid & body
fluid kits
COVER 217 CONTENTS
Class B or Class C Checklist
Straight Truck or Other Straight Vehicle
In-Vehicle/Engine Start
*air or *hydraulic brake check
parking & trailer brake check
service brake check
lighting indicators
emergency equipment
windshield & traffic monitoring devices
wipers & washers
heater & defroster
horn(s)
Lights Operations Check
all external lights
Front of Vehicle/Engine Area
lenses
fluid levels
fluid & air leaks
steering systems
Steering Axle
tires
rims
lug nuts
brake contaminates
springs/mounts & u-bolts & air bags & shocks
brake lines or hoses & leaks
Side of Vehicle
lenses & reflectors
traffic monitoring devices
battery
fuel tank/DEF tank
frame(s)
Rear of Trailer
lenses & reflectors
* Automatic failure if not performed correctly
You are only required to inspect the items on the CDL Vehicle Inspection checklist.
You may use this checklist for your test and check off items as you have completed them, NO additional
markings or writing may be placed on this list. You MUST name, point to and/or touch and fully
explain what you are inspecting each safety critical item for. If you do not do so, you will not get credit
for the item(s).
COVER 218 CONTENTS
Class B or Class C Checklist
Passenger or School Bus
In-Vehicle/Engine Start
*air or *hydraulic brake check
parking & trailer brake check
service brake check
lighting indicators
emergency equipment
windshield & traffic monitoring devices
wipers & washers
heater & defroster
horn(s)
Passenger and School Bus Only
passenger entry & lift
emergency exits
passenger seating
passenger monitoring devices
School Bus Only
student lights (front & back)
stop arm(s) & safety arm
first aid & body fluid kits
Lights Operations Check
all external lights
Front of Vehicle/Engine Area
lenses
fluid levels
fluid & air leaks
steering systems
Steering Axle
tires
rims
lug nuts
brake contaminates
springs/mounts & u-bolts & air bags & shocks
brake lines or hoses & leaks
Side of Vehicle
lenses & reflectors
traffic monitoring
devices
battery
fuel tank/DEF tank
frame(s)
Rear of Trailer
lenses & reflectors
* Automatic failure if not performed correctly
You are only required to inspect the items on the CDL Vehicle Inspection checklist.
You may use this checklist for your test and check off items as you have completed them, NO additional
markings or writing may be placed on this list. You MUST name, point to and/or touch and fully
explain what you are inspecting each safety critical item for. If you do not do so, you will not get credit
for the item(s).
COVER 219 CONTENTS
SECTION 12M: BASIC
CONTROL SKILLS TEST
This Section Covers
· Basic Control Skills Test Scoring
· Basic Control Skills Test Exercises
For the Basic Control Skills test, you will
demonstrate basic skills in controlling a
commercial vehicle and judging its position
in relation to other objects.
It tests for the basic skills needed for safe
control and operation of the vehicle. The
types of judgment and skills required for
these basic control skills are also required in
many different driving situations.
You will receive points for changing
direction to gain a better position, crossing
over or touching boundary lines or cones
and for your final position.
You may be permitted to exit the vehicle to
check around the vehicle during backing
exercises. When entering/exiting the
vehicle, you must set your parking brake,
place the vehicle in neutral, and safely exit/
enter by facing the vehicle and maintaining
three (3) points of contact at all times (when
entering/exiting a bus, face forward and
maintain a firm grasp on the handrail).
If at any time you open the door, move
from a seated position when in physical
control of the vehicle, (or on a bus, walk to
the back to get a better view), you will be
scored for a look.
You will receive specific instructions for
each exercise prior to performing them. You
will have an opportunity to ask questions.
You must complete the exercise as directed.
If you see the examiner raise their hand
(like this ), stop and return your vehicle
within the exercise boundary lines.
Your Basic Control Skills test will include
the following exercises, either off-road or
somewhere on the street during the Road
Test:
· Step 1­Forward Stop,
· Step 2­Straight-Line Backing,
· Step 3­Forward Offset Tracking, and
· Step 4­Reverse Offset Backing.
These exercises are shown in Figures 12M.1
through 12M.4.
12M.1 Scoring
During the Basic Control Skills test
exercises, you will be scored for:
Pull-ups
Pulling forward on a backing exercise to
clear an encroachment or to get a better
position is scored as a "pull-up." These
exercises include Exercise 2­Straight-Line
Backing and Exercise 4­Reverse Offset
Backing. The examiner will score the
number of times you pull-up.
Stopping without changing direction does
not count as a pull-up.
You will not be penalized for initial pull-ups.
However, an excessive number of pull-ups,
will count as errors. Your examiner will
cover "pull-ups" when giving instructions
for these exercises.
Encroachments
Crossing over or touching exercise boundary
lines or cones with any portion of your
vehicle, other than the vehicle's mirrors (door
or fender) or other unique vehicle parts at
door mirror height or higher, such as a bucket
truck, is scored as an encroachment. Unique
parts below door mirror height are counted
as an "encroachment."
COVER 220 CONTENTS
If you have encroached, the examiner will
stop you and you must return the vehicle
within the exercise boundaries. You must
stop immediately when signaled by the
examiner. The examiner will score the
number of times you touch or cross over
an exercise boundary line or cone. Each
encroachment will count as an error.
Looks
Exiting the vehicle while performing an
exercise to check the vehicle's position while
backing. You may be permitted to safely stop
and exit the vehicle to check the external
position of the vehicle (look).
When doing so, you must set the parking
brake(s) and place the vehicle in neutral/
park. Then, when exiting/entering the
vehicle, you must do so safely by facing the
vehicle and maintaining three (3) points of
contact with the vehicle at all times (when
exiting/entering a bus, you may face forward
and maintain a firm grasp on the handrail).
If you do not safely secure the vehicle or
safely exit/enter the vehicle, it may result in
an automatic failure for an unsafe act.
If you open your door or move from a seated
position, it will count as a "look." If you
open your door while the vehicle is moving
(not in neutral and park), it may result in an
automatic failure for an unsafe act.
On a bus, if you walk to the back of the bus
to get a better view, it will count as a "look."
You may be allowed a maximum of one
(1) free look on Exercise 2­Straight-line
Backing, and two (2) free looks on Exercise
4­Reverse Offset Backing, to check the
position of your vehicle. Your examiner will
cover "looks" when giving instructions for
these exercises.
Final Position
The final position of the vehicle for backing
exercises. You will be scored for final
vehicle position on Exercise 2­Straight-
Line Backing and on Exercise 4­Reverse
Offset Backing.
It is important that you finish each exercise
exactly as the examiner has instructed.
Your vehicle must be within final exercise
boundaries (other than mirrors and unique
vehicle parts higher than the door mirrors,
such as a bucket truck). If you do not
maneuver the vehicle into its final position
as described by the examiner, you will be
penalized and will fail the Basic Control
Skills test. You MUST complete the exercises
as directed.
Upon completion of an exercise, set the
parking brake, place the vehicle in neutral/
park, and sound the horn indicating you
have completed the exercise.
Failure to Follow Instructions or
Unsafe Act
Failure to follow examiner instructions
for completing the exercise as directed
may result in an automatic failure and the
test may be terminated by the examiner.
Always follow the examiner instructions
and directions. If you do not understand
the instructions or understand how to
complete the exercises, ask the examiner
for clarification. [If permitted, you may
ask the examiner to walk you through the
exercise area.]
Committing an "unsafe act" (e.g., forgetting
to set the parking brake or opening the door
while in motion), may result in an automatic
failure for an unsafe act and the test may be
terminated by the examiner. Safety of the
driver, the examiner and the testing area is of
the highest priority. Always think SAFETY.
COVER 221 CONTENTS
12M.2 Exercises
12M.2.1 Exercise 1­
Forward Stop
You will demonstrate your ability to judge
the front of your vehicle during a
controlled stop. Drive forward
through the alley and stop with
the front most part of the vehicle
(other than unique vehicle parts
higher than the door mirrors,
such as a bucket truck) within the box at
the end of the alley without going past it.
You may stop only once.
Your examiner will point out the front
most part of your vehicle when giving
instructions for this exercise.
When you have stopped, set your parking
brake, shift to neural/park and sound the
horn. You will receive points if the front
most part of the vehicle (other than unique
vehicle parts higher than the door mirrors,
such as a bucket truck) is not in the stop
box. (See Figure 12M.1).
12M.2.2 Exercise 2­
Straight Line Backing
You will demonstrate your ability to back a
vehicle in a straight line. From your stopped
position from the previous exercise, the
examiner will ask you to pull forward and
stop when they raise their hand (like this ).
Then back straight through the alley until
the front of your vehicle has cleared the last
set of cones at the far end of the alley. (See
Figure 12M.2)
You will be scored for pull-ups,
encroachments and final position.
You are allowed one (1) free pull-up and may
safely exit the vehicle only one (1) time to
check around the vehicle.
When you have completed the exercise, set
your parking brake, shift to neutral/park
and sound your horn. This will inform the
examiner you have completed the exercise.
12M.2.3 Exercise 3­
Forward Offset Tracking
You will demonstrate your ability to
maneuver a vehicle around other objects
while moving forward without stopping.
You will drive forward and
steer to the left through the
opening into the opposite lane,
keeping the right most rear tire
between the cone and the line
without stopping.
You will be scored for encroachments
and forward tracking clearance (rear tire
between the cone and the line).
You are NOT allowed to stop, back-up or exit
the vehicle during this exercise. If you stop,
the exercise will be ended.
Stop your vehicle when you are parallel to
the outer boundary, prior to or at the cones
at the far end of the exercise. Then, set
your parking brake, shift to neutral/park
and sound your horn. This will inform the
examiner you have completed the exercise.
(See Figure 12M.3)
COVER 222 CONTENTS
12M.2.4 Exercise 4­Reverse
Offset Backing
You will demonstrate your ability to offset
back and park a vehicle at the end of an
alley. Starting parallel with the outer
boundary, offset back into the alley, bringing
the rear most part of your vehicle (other
than unique vehicle parts higher than the
door mirrors, such as a bucket truck) within
three (3) feet of the rear of the alley.
Stop with the rear
most part of the
vehicle (other than
unique vehicle parts)
in the three (3) foot
box at the end of the alley.
Your examiner will point out the rear most
part of your vehicle when giving instructions
for this exercise.
Your vehicle must be straight within the
alley when completed. Your vehicle must
be completely within the defined exercise
boundaries when completed (other than
mirrors or other unique vehicle parts higher
than the door mirrors, such as a bucket
truck). You may not go beyond the outer
boundary line. (See Figure 12M.4)
If you back beyond the rear boundary of the
alley, you will be required to pull straight
forward past the alley entrance, prior to
resuming the exercise.
You will be scored for pull-ups,
encroachments and final position.
You are allowed two (2) free pull-ups and
may exit the vehicle a maximum of two (2)
times to check around the vehicle during
this exercise.
When you have completed the exercise, set
your parking brake, shift to neutral/park
and sound your horn. This will inform the
examiner you have completed the exercise.
Road Test
Remember, the Basic Control Skills test
must be passed before you can proceed to
the Road Test.
COVER 223 CONTENTS
Figure 12M.1: Exercise 1­Forward Stop
Figure 12M.2: Exercise 2­Straight Line Backing
Figure 12M.3: Exercise 3­Forward Offset Tracking
Figure 12M.4: Exercise 4­Reverse Offset Backing
COVER 224 CONTENTS
Basic Control Skills Diagram with Cone Placement
COVER 225 CONTENTS
Larger view of markers and boxes
Larger view of markers and boxes
Dimensions
Basic Control Skills Dimensions
COVER 226 CONTENTS
SECTION 13: ON ROAD
DRIVING TEST
This section covers:
· How You Will Be Tested
You will drive over a test route that has a
variety of traffic situations. At all times
during the test, you must drive in a safe and
responsible manner and:
· Wear your safety belt.
· Obey all traffic signs, signals, and laws.
· Complete the test without a crash or
moving violation.
During the driving test, the examiner will
score you on specific driving maneuvers as
well as on your general driving behavior.
You will follow the directions of the
examiner. Directions will be given to you so
you will have plenty of time to do what the
examiner has asked. You will not be asked
to drive in an unsafe manner.
If your test route does not have certain
traffic situations, you may be asked to
simulate a traffic situation. You will do this
by telling the examiner what you are or
would be doing if you were in that traffic
situation.
Study all of subsection 13.1 to better
understand how you will be tested.
Subsection 13.1 constitutes the CDL Skills
Test Guide.
NOTE: Licensed commercial drivers
are subject to retesting by Wisconsin
DMV and Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration CDL examiners.
13.1 How you will be tested
13.1.1 Turns
· You have been asked to make a turn:
 Check traffic in all directions.
 Use turn signals and safely get into
the lane needed for the turn.
· As you approach the turn:
 Use turn signals to warn others of
your turn.
 Slow down smoothly, change gears
as needed to keep power, but do
not coast unsafely. Unsafe coasting
occurs when your vehicle is out of
gear (clutch depressed or gearshift in
neutral) for more than the length of
your vehicle.
· If you must stop before making the turn:
 Come to a smooth stop without
skidding.
 Come to a complete stop behind the
stop line, crosswalk, or stop sign.
 If stopping behind another vehicle,
stop where you can see the rear tires
on the vehicle ahead of you (safe gap).
 Do not let your vehicle roll.
 Keep the front wheels aimed straight
ahead.
· When ready to turn:
 Check traffic in all directions.
 Keep both hands on the steering
wheel during the turn.
 Keep checking your mirror to make
sure the vehicle does not hit anything
on the inside of the turn.
 Vehicle should not move into
oncoming traffic.
 Vehicle should finish turn in correct
lane.
COVER 227 CONTENTS
· After turn:
 Make sure turn signal is off.
 Get up to speed of traffic, use turn
signal and move into right-most lane
when safe to do so (if not already
there).
 Check mirrors and traffic.
Starting one turn from the wrong lane
or completing two or more turns into the
wrong lane is a disqualification.
13.1.2 Intersections
· As you approach an intersection:
 Check traffic thoroughly in all
directions.
 Decelerate gently.
 Brake smoothly and, if necessary,
change gears.
 If necessary, come to a complete
stop (no coasting) behind any stop
signs, signals, sidewalks, or stop lines
maintaining a safe gap behind any
vehicle in front of you.
 Your vehicle must not roll forward or
backward.
· When driving through an intersection:
 Check traffic thoroughly in all
directions.
 Decelerate and yield to any
pedestrians and traffic in the
intersection.
 Do not change lanes while
proceeding through the intersection.
 Keep your hands on the wheel.
· Once through the intersection:
 Continue checking mirrors and
traffic.
 Accelerate smoothly and change
gears as necessary.
13.1.3 Urban business
During this part of the test, you are
expected to make regular traffic checks and
maintain a safe following distance. Your
vehicle should be centered in the proper
lane (right-most lane) and you should keep
up with the flow of traffic but not exceed the
posted speed limit.
13.1.4 Lane changes
During multiple lane portions of the test,
you will be asked to change lanes to the left,
and then back to the right. You should make
the necessary traffic checks first, then use
proper signals and smoothly change lanes
when it is safe to do so.
13.1.5 Expressway or rural/
limited access highway
· Before entering the expressway:
 Check traffic.
 Use proper signals.
 Merge smoothly into the proper lane
of traffic.
· Once on the expressway:
 Maintain proper lane positioning,
vehicle spacing and vehicle speed.
 Continue to check traffic thoroughly
in all directions.
· When exiting the expressway:
 Make necessary traffic checks.
 Use proper signals.
 Decelerate smoothly in the exit lane.
 Once on the exit ramp, you must
continue to decelerate within the lane
markings and maintain adequate
spacing between your vehicle and
other vehicles.
COVER 228 CONTENTS
13.1.6 Stop/start
For this maneuver, you will be asked to pull
your vehicle over to the side of the road
and stop as if you were going to get out and
check something on your vehicle. You must
check traffic thoroughly in all directions
and move to the right-most lane or shoulder
of road.
· As you prepare for the stop:
 Check traffic.
 Activate your right turn signal.
 Decelerate smoothly, brake evenly,
change gears as necessary.
 Bring your vehicle to a full stop
without coasting.
· Once stopped:
 Vehicle must be parallel to the curb
or shoulder of the road and safely out
of the traffic flow.
 Vehicle should not be blocking
driveways, fire hydrants,
intersections, signs, etc.
 Cancel your turn signal.
 Activate your four-way emergency
flashers.
 Apply the parking brake.
 Move the gear shift to neutral or
park.
 Remove your feet from the brake and
clutch pedals.
· When instructed to resume:
 Check traffic and your mirrors
thoroughly in all directions.
 Turn off your four-way flashers.
 Activate the left turn signal.
 When traffic permits, you should
release the parking brake and pull
straight ahead.
 Do not turn the wheel before your
vehicle moves.
 Check traffic from all directions,
especially to the left.
 Steer and accelerate smoothly into
the proper lane when safe to do so.
 Once your vehicle is back into the
flow of traffic, cancel your left turn
signal.
13.1.7 Curve
· When approaching a curve:
 Check traffic thoroughly in all
directions.
 Before entering the curve, reduce
speed so further braking or shifting
is not required in the curve.
 Keep vehicle in the lane.
 Continue checking traffic in all
directions.
13.1.8 Railroad crossing
· Before reaching the crossing, all
commercial drivers should:
 Decelerate, brake smoothly and shift
gears as necessary.
 Look and listen for the presence of
trains.
 Check traffic in all directions.
Do not stop, change gears, pass another
vehicle or change lanes while any part of
your vehicle is in the crossing.
· If you are driving a bus, a school bus, or
a vehicle displaying placards, you should
be prepared to observe the following
procedures at every railroad crossing
(unless the crossing is exempt):
 As the vehicle approaches a railroad
crossing, activate the four-way
flashers.
COVER 229 CONTENTS
 Stop the vehicle within 50 feet but not
less than 15 feet from the nearest rail.
 Listen and look in both directions
along the track for an approaching
train and for signals indicating the
approach of a train. If operating a
bus, you may also be required to
open the window and door prior to
crossing tracks.
 Keep hands on the steering wheel as
the vehicle crosses the tracks.
 Do not stop, change gears or change
lanes while any part of your vehicle is
proceeding across the tracks.
 Four-way flashers should be
deactivated after the vehicle crosses
the tracks.
 Continue to check mirrors and
traffic.
Not all driving road test routes will have
a railroad crossing. You may be asked to
explain and demonstrate the proper railroad
crossing procedures to the examiner at a
simulated location.
13.1.9 Bridge/overpass/sign
After driving under an overpass, you may
be asked to tell the examiner what the
posted clearance or height was. After going
over a bridge, you may be asked to tell the
examiner what the posted weight limit was.
If your test route does not have a bridge or
overpass, you may be asked about another
traffic sign. When asked, be prepared to
identify and explain to the examiner any
traffic sign which may appear on the route.
13.1.10 Student discharge
(school bus)
If you are applying for a School Bus
endorsement, you will be required to
demonstrate loading and unloading
students. Please refer to Section 10 of this
manual for procedures on loading and
unloading school students.
13.1.11 General
driving behaviors
You will be scored on your overall
performance in the following general
driving behavior categories.
13.1.11(a) Clutch usage (for manual
transmissions)
· Always use clutch to shift.
· If equipped with an unsynchronized
manual transmission, you must double-
clutch when shifting. Do not rev or lug
the engine.
· Do not ride clutch to control speed, coast
with the clutch depressed or "pop" the
clutch.
13.1.12(b) Gear usage (for manual
transmissions)
· Do not grind or clash gears.
· Select gear that does not rev or lug
engine.
· Do not shift in turns or intersections.
13.1.13(c) Brake usage
· Do not ride or pump brake.
· Do not brake harshly. Brake smoothly
using steady pressure.
13.1.14(d) Lane usage
· Do not put vehicle over curbs, sidewalks
or lane markings.
· Stop behind stop lines, crosswalks or
stop signs.
COVER 230 CONTENTS
· Complete a turn in the proper lane on a
multiple lane road (vehicle should finish
a left turn in the lane directly to the right
of the center line).
· Finish a right turn in the right-most
(curb) lane.
· Move to or remain in right-most lane
unless lane is blocked.
13.1.15 Steering
· Do not over or under steer the vehicle.
· Keep both hands on the steering wheel
at all times unless shifting. Once you
have completed shift, return both hands
to the steering wheel.
13.1.16 Regular traffic checks
· Check traffic regularly.
· Check mirrors regularly.
· Check mirrors and traffic before, while in
and after an intersection.
· Scan and check traffic in high volume
areas and areas where pedestrians are
expected to be present.
13.1.17 Use of turn signals
· Use turn signals properly.
· Activate turn signals when required.
· Activate turn signals at appropriate
times.
· Cancel turn signals upon completion of a
turn or lane change.
13.1.18 Immediate
disqualification (Wisconsin)
Crash
The driver is involved in any crash the
driver could have prevented or contacts any
fixed object or pedestrian.
Dangerous act
Driver almost causes a crash. This includes
the driver:
· Forcing someone else to take immediate
action.
· Causing the examiner to take action to
avoid a crash.
· Backing up because the driver took a
turn too short.
· Driving over a curb.
· Not checking traffic or not slowing down
when going through an uncontrolled
intersection.
· Rolling back more than 24 inches.
· Having both hands off the steering wheel
for an extended period of time.
Law violations
Violating any traffic law. This includes but is
not limited to:
· Speeding.
· Failing to stop for a stop sign or traffic
signal.
· Making one turn entirely from the wrong
lane.
· Turning into the wrong lane (two times)
at the completion of a turn.
· Failing to signal properly, affecting other
traffic.
COVER 231 CONTENTS
Publication notes
The Wisconsin Department of
Transportation intends that the products
and services it offers be accessible to all.
If you need accommodations or do not
understand any part of this publication,
please contact any Division of Motor
Vehicles (DMV) Service Center.
You may reproduce the Wisconsin
Commercial Driver's Manual in whole or
in part for yourself or for others. You may
charge others the actual or reasonable costs
to reproduce the Wisconsin Commercial
Driver's Manual. You may not delete, add,
alter or otherwise change the Manual
without the express written consent of the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation.
BDS356, May 2026
Ch. 343 Wis. Stats.
Wisconsin Commercial Driver's Manual
Information in this and other handbooks
and manuals published by the Division of
Motor Vehicles is not all inclusive and is
subject to change.
The Wisconsin Division of Motor Vehicles
(DMV) uses the American Association of
Motor Vehicles Administrators (AAMVA),
Modernized Testing System (2022) which
was authorized by the Federal Motor
Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA).
Prior to November 4, 2024­DMV used
the AAMVA 2005 CDL Testing System
authorized by FMCSA.
COVER 232 CONTENTS
