Louisiana Administrative Code
Title 55
Part III

§155. Third Party Tester/Examiner Requirements

    A. Act 307 of the 2011 legislative session amended R.S. 32:408 to require all driver education providers to

become certified as third party testers by June 30, 2012.

    A. Act 307 of the 2011 Legislative Session amended R.S. 32:408 to require all driver education providers to become

certified as third party testers by June 30, 2012. Driver Education providers must become certified as third party testers

but may opt not to perform as third party testers.

    B. All persons seeking to become certified by and contract with DPS to be a third party tester to administer the

road skills test pursuant to R.S. 32:408 shall meet the following requirements:

    1. successfully complete an OMV sanctioned examiners course;

    2. meet all qualifications of a driving school owner as outlined in §145, Qualifications for Private Driving

School Owners and Instructors;

C.  Qualifications for a Third Party Tester Examiner

    1. An examiner shall meet all requirements for a behind the wheel instructor listed in this part in addition to

the following:

    a. successful completion of the Office of Motor Vehicle certified examiner training course.

    AUTHORITY NOTE: Promulgated in accordance with R.S. 32:402.1(A) (1) AND R.S. 40:1461.

    HISTORICAL NOTE: Promulgated by the Department of Public Safety and Corrections, Office of Motor Vehicles, LR 38:

§156. Application Process and Fees for Third Party Testers/Examiners

    A. Each person requesting to be certified by and contract with DPS as a third party tester shall submit the

following:

    1. completed third party tester application for class D and E driver's license;

    2. certificate of insurance as outlined in this Subchapter;

    3. completed application for examiner license;

    4. non-refundable $50 annual application fee for each tester location, which shall be collected biennially and a

$25 non-refundable annual application fee for each examiner, which shall be collected biennially, in the form of a

money order, certified check or public school check made payable to DPS;

    5. If the applicant is not a currently licensed driving school owner or instructor, each applicant must

successfully pass a fingerprint background check. The background check will be conducted in a manner set forth by

DPS. Each applicant must pay the background check fee by a separate certified check or money order. The current

fee is $26.

    6. If the applicant is not a currently licensed driving school owner, all documents required to verify that the

applicant meets the qualifications for a driving school owner as outlined in this part, must be submitted.

    B. Each applicant for third party examiner certification shall submit the following:

    1. completed application for third party examiner certification;

    2. If the applicant is not a currently licensed driving school instructor, each applicant must successfully pass a

fingerprint background check. The background check will be conducted in a manner set forth by DPS. Each

applicant must pay the background check fee by a separate certified check or money order. The current fee is $26.

    3. If the applicant is not a currently licensed driving school instructor, all documents required to verify that the

applicant meets the qualifications for a driving school owner as outlined in this part, must be submitted.

    C. Renewal

    1. The renewal schedule is December 31 each year for privately owned facilities and August 31 for secondary

school facilities.

    2. Application for renewal of certification shall be made on the prescribed form, accompanied by a non-

refundable fee of $100 for each location and $50 for each individual examiner certificate, in the form of a money

order or a certified check made payable to DPS. No personal or business checks will be accepted.

    3. All renewal applications for privately owned schools shall be submitted to the Office of Motor Vehicles

before the close of business, October 1, of the renewal year. All renewal applications for secondary and alternative

schools shall be submitted to the Office of Motor Vehicles before the close of business, June 1, of the renewal year.

    4. All renewal applications for third party testers and examiners which are licensed driver education providers

shall be submitted in conjunction with the renewal for the driver education programs.

    5. Applications received after the deadline, will be deemed untimely and may cause delay in renewal of the

license. A third party tester which has submitted an untimely renewal application and who has not been certified
prior to the expiration of the current certificate, shall not be authorized to conduct any road skills tests after that
certificate expires, until the license is renewed.

     6. Incomplete renewal applications may result in the license renewal being delayed or denied.
     7. Background checks on owners and examiners will be conducted upon license renewal.
     8. The following documents shall be submitted as part of the renewal packet:

        a. completed application for each location;
        b. completed application for each examiner;
        c. certificate of insurance in the company name stating that all vehicles are currently insured and that upon
cancellation or expiration, the Training and Certification Unit of Office of Motor Vehicles shall be notified. This
certificate shall be from the issuing insurance carrier, not the agency; identify (by description and vehicle
identification number) the vehicle(s) covered. The limits shall be $500,000 in auto liability and $1,000,000 in
general liability;
        d. a non-refundable fee of $50 for each location and $25 for each individual examiner certificate, in the
form of a money order or a certified check made payable to DPS. No personal or business checks will be accepted.
        e. completed background check forms and certified check or money order for $26 for each examiner and
owner for facilities that are not driving schools.
     9. Any facility that fails to renew his license/contract within six months of expiration, shall be required to
begin the initial application process again.
   AUTHORITY NOTE: Promulgated in accordance with R.S. 32:402.1(A)(1) AND R.S. 40:1461.
   HISTORICAL NOTE: Promulgated by the Department of Public Safety and Corrections, Office of Motor Vehicles, LR 38:
§157. General Regulations for Third Party Testers
  A. General Regulations
     1. Upon approval of the application, all third party testers shall execute a contract with DPS authorizing them
to administer the road skills test.
     2. All third party examiners shall comply with and abide by all applicable statutes and regulations as well as
all terms of the contract executed by the third party tester or third party examiner and DPS.
     3. The school shall agree to permit DPS representatives to inspect the school and shall make available to DPS,
when requested to do so, full information pertaining to any or all items of information pertaining to the testing
operation. Upon request, the school shall provide photo copies of the school's records required by DPS.
     4. A representative of the Federal Highway Administration and/or a DPS representative may conduct random
examinations, inspections, and audits without prior notice.
     5. The facility shall conspicuously display the issued certificate in the business during operational hours.
     6. The tester and/or examiner shall not assist a person in obtaining a driver's license by deceptive practices.
     7. The tester and/or examiner shall not state or imply, that upon completion of the road skills test, the securing
of a driver's license is guaranteed or assured.
     8. A DPS representative shall annually take a road skills test administered by the licensed third party examiner
or test a sample of drivers who were examined by the third party to compare pass/fail results.
     9. A third party tester/examiner shall not commence administering the road skills test until authorized to do so
by DPS.
     10. If at any time, a third party tester/examiner ceases to meet any requirement imposed by statute, the
regulations, or the contract, the third party tester or the third party examiner shall immediately cease all testing.
     11. Each student administered the road skills test shall be notified, prior to testing, that he is subject to being
retested by the Office of Motor Vehicles at any time.
     12. Private driving schools may administer road skills tests to the general public. Authorized Secondary School
Driver education program providers shall administer road skills tests only to students enrolled in his school or his
driver education program.
     13. All third party examiners shall submit to and receive approval from DPS of a test route for use in the
administration of skills testing to driver applicants for each location approved by DPS. The route shall be different
from the routes used during any eight hour behind the wheel training.
  B. Record Keeping
     1. When the student requires the administration of a road skills test, the following information shall be
maintained in the records, in date order, and shall be maintained for five years from the date of the road skills test:
        a. completed application for road skills test (DPSMV2271);
        b. completed disclosure of terms for applicants (DPSMV2273);
        c. completed road skills driving test (DPSMV2005A);
        d. completed test history form (DPSMV30059) furnished by DPS, if applicable;
        e. completed road skills test certificate (DPSMV 2272), if applicable.
     2. Every Third Party Tester shall maintain an ascending numerical accounting record of all certificates issued.
The records and all unused road skills test certificates shall be opened for inspection by DPS during normal business
hours.
     3. The tester shall submit a monthly report of the skills test performed the previous month. The report shall
list by week the number of skills tests given, the number of tests passed, the number of tests failed and total all
categories listed above for the month. This report shall be submitted by the tenth of the month in the format and
delivery method prescribed by OMV.
  C. Safety and Insurance
     1. A certificate of insurance shall be filed with DPS in the business name stating that all vehicles utilized in
the road skills test administration are currently insured and that upon cancellation or expiration, the training and
Certification Unit, Office of Motor Vehicles will be notified. This certificate shall be from the issuing insurance
carrier, not the agency; identify (by description and vehicle identification number) the vehicle(s) covered. The limits
shall be $500,000 in auto liability and $1,000,000 in general liability.
     2. If the school is covered under a fleet policy and desires to add another vehicle to its fleet, it shall advise the
insurance company to notify DPS, in writing that this unit (specifying the make, model and vehicle identification
number) has been added.
     3. The examiner may refuse to administer the test at any time he determines the condition of the applicant,
roads, or weather to be unsafe.
  D. Road Skills Test Certificate (DPSMV 2272) Requirements
     1. Road skills test certificates shall be issued to applicants who successfully complete a road skills test as
approved by the Office of Motor Vehicles.
     2. No third party tester shall issue a certificate to a person who has not successfully completed the approved
road skills test.
     3. All blank road skills tests certificates shall be kept in a secure place under lock and key and only available
to those representatives of the third party tester authorized to issue such certificates and DPS representatives.
     4. Lost or stolen road skills test certificates shall be reported to DPS immediately. If a theft or suspected theft
has occurred, the local law enforcement agency shall also be notified and a police report sent to OMV immediately.
  E. Testing Preparation Policies
     1. Each applicant shall be required to present proof of identity as outlined in the Office of Motor Vehicles
policy along with the completed Test History form provided by the Office of Motor Vehicles.
     2. The legal custodial/domiciliary parent/guardian of an applicant under the age of 18 shall sign a consent
statement, provide proper identification and provide proof that he or she is the legal custodial/domiciliary
parent/guardian.
     3. All applicants shall sign the Disclosure of Terms form supplied by OMV. If the applicant is under the age of
18, the legal custodial/domiciliary parent/guardian shall also sign. This form shall be kept in the files.
     4. The fee for a road skills tests shall not exceed $40. This shall cover all expenses including the cost of the
original and one additional copy of the road skills test certificate provided to each applicant.
     5. A copy of the certificate shall be placed in the applicant's file and maintained by the tester for a minimum
of five years.
     6. Only examiners which are certified adaptive driver trainers shall administer road skills tests to applicants
that require adaptive equipment, including bioptic telescopic lenses.
  F. Test Administration Policies
     1. Only examiners who have been approved and certified by DPS shall administer road skills tests.
     2. Only the applicant, examiner, examiner's supervisor, DPS representative, or interpreter, if necessary, are
allowed in the vehicle when a road skills test is being administered.
     3. Each driving course layout shall include (as a minimum) the following for scoring purposes:

        a. two stop signs (one with an obstructed view, if possible);
        b. two traffic lights;
        c. two lane changes;
        d. two intersections, without a turn;

        e. two reversal proceduresoptions:
           i. into and out of a parking space;
          ii. three point turn;

        f. three left turns, one of which includes a left turn onto a multiple-lane roadway;
        g. three right turns, one of which includes a right turn onto a multiple-lane roadway;
        h. one parking maneuver.
     4. In the administration of the road skills test, each third party examiner shall measure the performance of the
applicant in each of the following operational skills:

        a. observing;
        b. communicating;
        c. speed adjustment;
        d. vehicle positioning;
        e. time and space judgment;
        f. hazard perception.
     5. Standardized instructions shall be utilized when conducting a road skills test.
     6. Approved scoring criteria shall be standardized, as determined and approved by DPS. If using a vehicle
with a dual brake, it shall be an automatic failure of the test if the examiner has to use the brake for any reason.
  G. Suspension, Revocation and Penalty Assessment
     1. All regulations outlined in this chapter shall be adhered to by the school and its employees. DPS may
suspend or revoke any third party tester certification or examiner license issued under these rules and regulations
upon discovery of satisfactory evidence of violations. If the violation involves the owner of the school or other
management staff, then the driving school will be assessed penalties or the license may be suspended or revoked. If
the violation involves the instructor, then the instructor may be fined or the instructor's license may be suspended or
revoked, depending on the nature of the violation. Fines may be assessed up to $500. If the fine is not paid, the
license shall be revoked.
     2. Any third party tester/examiner whose certification or license is denied, suspended, or revoked, or who was
assessed a fine shall have the right to appeal the action in the same manner as provided in §151, Regulations for All
Driver Education Providers, Subsection D.
H. Although driving schools are required to be a third party tester, driving schools are not required to administer the road skills
test.
AUTHORITY NOTE:Promulgated in accordance with R.S. 32:402.1(A)(1) AND R.S. 40:1461, and R.S. 32:408.1.
   HISTORICAL NOTE: Promulgated by the Department of Public Safety and Corrections, Office of Motor Vehicles, LR 38:
§159. Military Exemption
A. Any active duty military person who has not been previously licensed in this state or another state, upon proving his
active duty status, may submit proof of successful completion of military driver training, which is essentially equivalent to
the training required in this part, in lieu of providing the completion certificate required in this Part.

AUTHORITY NOTE: Promulgated in accordance with R.S.
32:402.1(A)(1), R.S. 32:408.1, and R.S. 40:1461.
HISTORICAL NOTE: Promulgated by the Department of
Public Safety and Corrections, Office of Motor Vehicles, LR
