 Commercial
Driver License

    Manual

      2005 CDL Testing System

                 Version: July 2017

                                CDL Driver's Manual
                           COPYRIGHT © 2005 AAMVA

                                 All Rights Reserved
This material is based upon work supported by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
  Administration under Cooperative Agreement No. DTFH61-97-X-00017. Any
       opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
publication are those of the Author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of
                     the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration.

                                                            COPYRIGHT © 2005 AAMVA. All rights reserved

This material has been created for and provided to State Driver License Agencies (SDLAs) by AAMVA for the purpose of educating Driver
License applicants (Commercial or Non-Commercial). Permission to reproduce, use, distribute or sell this material has been granted to
SDLAs only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system without express written permission from the author / publisher.
Any unauthorized reprint, use, distribution or sale of this material is prohibited.
Human trafficking is modern-day slavery. Traffickers use force, fraud and coercion to control their victims.
Any minor engaged in commercial sex is a victim of human trafficking. Trafficking can occur in many
locations, including truck stops, restaurants, rest areas, brothels, strip clubs, private homes, etc. Truckers
are the eyes and the ears of our nation's highways. If you see a minor working any of those areas or suspect
pimp control, call the National Hotline and report your tip:

                                                      1-888-3737-888 (US)
                                                      1-800-222-TIPS (Canada)

For law enforcement to open an investigation on your tip, they need "actionable information." Specific tips
helpful when reporting to the hotline would include:

     Descriptions of cars (make, model, color, license plate number, etc.) and people (height, weight,

          hair color, eye color, age, etc.)

     Take a picture if you can.
     Specific times and dates (When did you see the event in question take place? What day was it?)
     Addresses and locations where suspicious activity took place

Trafficking Red Flags to Look for:

     Lack of knowledge of their community or whereabouts
     Not in control of own identification documents (ID/passport)
     Restricted or controlled communication--not allowed to speak for self
     Demeanor: fear, anxiety, depression, submissive, tense, nervous

Questions to Ask:

     Are you being paid?
     Are you being watched or followed?
     Are you free to leave? Come and go as you please?
     Are you physically or sexually abused? Are you or your family threatened? What is the nature of the

          threats?

Report by Email: Report@PolarisProject.org

Warning: Please do not approach traffickers. Call the hotline, and they will call the FBI and local police to
deal with them and rescue the victims. Approaching traffickers is not only dangerous for you and their
victims but could lead to problems in the eventual prosecution of traffickers. Go to
www.truckersagainsttrafficking.org for more information.
LITTER LAW AND STATS
Louisiana spends more than $40 million a year to clean up our highways. In 2004 alone, state and
sheriff cleanup crews picked up an estimated 450,000 bags (20,000 miles) of trash in our state.

LITTERING
Whether accidental or deliberate, littering is against the law. Depending on the nature and severity of
the littering, you can face either civil or criminal prosecution. According to Louisiana R.S.30:2531-
2531.3, penalties for conviction range from a $50 fine plus 8 hours community service picking up litter
to a $5,000 fine, one year driver's license suspension, 30 days in jail AND 100 hours of community
service. The driver is responsible for all litter coming from the vehicle's interior or truck bed, and the
driver can be cited for littering committed by the passengers in his/her vehicle. Along roadways,
motorists and pedestrians are the biggest contributors to litter.

Tobacco products, mostly cigarette butts, are the most littered item along Louisiana roadways.
Many individuals believe that cigarette butts are biodegradable. This is incorrect. While some parts
of the cigarette usually decompose in one year, other parts never do because the filter is made of a
type of acetate that never fully breaks down. Worst yet, the cigarette butt that is thrown on the ground
will eventually find its way into the ocean or some other body of water. A recent cleanup of coastal
shorelines by volunteers found that 80% of the collected litter was washed from land into the water.
Cigarettes and cigarette butts accounted for a whopping 25% of the total collected. Cigarettes and
cigarette butts also contain many harmful chemicals which leak into the environment. To many
people, a cigarette butt may seem like a small thing, but with several trillion butts discarded every
year, toxic chemicals add up, and the damage to the environment is multiplied many times over.

Another problem often seen is the litter from packaging and beverage containers. This includes fast
food, snacks, tobacco, or other product packaging, and soft drink and beer containers.

Storm drains are a trap for litter that collects from streets and sidewalks. These are located in gutters
and are designed to drain excess rainfall from paved streets and parking lots. Because storm drains
eventually lead to waterways, litter near storm drains can potentially contaminate our water. This
causes litter to first be a problem on land and then later in our water.

The presence of litter in a community takes its toll on the quality of life, property values, and housing
prices. Besides the environmental impact that litter imposes, there are also economic consequences.
Businesses pay about 80% of the cost to clean up litter with the government funding the remainder.
Many communities depend on volunteers to clean up litter. Research studies have shown that heavily
littered areas are more likely to be targeted for crime and vandalism. Individuals are more likely to
litter in a littered area. Once there, litter attracts more litter. This cycle continues unless and until we
change our minds about the way we think about litter.

Individual attitudes can change the way we think about litter. On average, one in every five individuals
is a litterer with most of the behavior being a conscious act. This includes dropping the item, flicking
or flinging it away, or just leaving it in on the ground, table, bench or ledge. Studies also show that
age, and not gender, is a significant factor in littering. Those under 30 are more likely to litter than
those who are older.
A clean community discourages litter and improves overall community quality of life. It is the
responsibility of every individual to care about his neighborhood, park, roadway, or other public
space. Don't just believe that someone will pick up after you when you litter. Start with these actions:
Choose not to litter. Make the commitment now to join with others not to spread litter.
Remind others not to litter and explain why.
Get a litter bag for your car or portable ash receptacles to share.
Volunteer in your community. Help prevent and clean up litter-from cigarette butts to illegal
dumps.
If you see litter, pick it up.
Become part of "Keep Louisiana Beautiful." With all of us working together, we can make a
difference.

Citizens may report litterers by calling 1-888-
LITRBUG, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. This
hotline is maintained by the Louisiana Department
of Wildlife and Fisheries. Cingular Wireless
customers in south Louisiana area may call
*LITTER.

The offender will receive a letter from DEQ
reminding him/her that littering is illegal and asking
for help in keeping Louisiana clean. You can also
post information regarding acts of litter at
Litter-Bug.org.

For more information concerning Louisiana's litter
abatement programs, visit the websites:
www.keeplouisianabeautiful.org and www.deq.state.la.us/assistance/litter/index/htm

ORGAN DONATION

                                                    Thousands of people are waiting for a lifesaving or life
                                                    enhancing organ, tissue or cornea transplant. When you apply
                                                    for a driver's permit, driver's license, or state ID card, you will
                                                    be asked whether or not you wish to register as an organ, eye
                                                    and tissue donor. Your designation will be marked on the front
                                                    of your license or ID card with a red heart.

                                                    If you register through the OMV in person, your wishes will be
                                                    indicated in the registry. You may also register online at
                                                    DonatelifeLA.org. Either method is legal documentation of
                                                    your desire to save lives.

Louisiana's registry allows citizens to make legally binding decisions to be donors. Family consent is
required only for minors. This makes it especially important for you to have a discussion with your
family about your wishes regarding donation.

Organs and tissues that can be donated include heart, lungs, liver, kidney, pancreas, intestines, skin,
heart valves, bone and connective tissue. For eye donation, the whole eye or the cornea can be
donated. Organs are distributed for transplantation on a patient-based, fair, equitable system. Donors
are treated with the greatest care and dignity throughout the donation process.

Here is some information to help you make an informed decision:

 Louisiana's registry allows citizens to make legally binding decisions to become donors. Drivers
under the age of 17 can participate in this program and register their intent.
 Anyone can be a potential donor regardless of age, race, or medical history.
 You have the ability to save 9 lives and heal the lives of up to 50 additional people through tissue
donation.
 The level of medical care you receive in any hospital is not affected by your choice to register as
an organ, eye and tissue donor. The recovery team is only called in after all attempts have been
made to save your life.
 All major religions approve of organ, eye, and tissue donation and see it as an unselfish act of
charity.
 There is no change in the appearance of the body after donation and no interference in funeral
plans, including an open casket.
 There is no cost or payment to your family or your estate when you become a donor.
 It is illegal to buy or sell organs in the United States.
 All patients on the waiting list throughout the country are registered with the United Network for
Organ Sharing (UNOS) computer network. Organs are placed based on blood type, size, weight,
severity of illness, time on the waiting list, and geography. It is illegal to allocate organs based on
fame, wealth, citizenship or political power.
 Transplantation is a medically accepted treatment and is not experimental. Organ donation is not
a search for the cure ­ it is the cure!

Today there are nearly 117,000 patients waiting for this live saving gift; over 1,800 here in Louisiana.
Every day 18 people die waiting for an organ, and every 13 minutes another name is added to the
national waiting list. Choose to be an organ and tissue donor and tell your family about your decision.

For more information visit DonateLifeLA.org.

VOTER REGISTRATION PROGRAM
The National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (NVRA), also known as The Motor Voter Act, was
signed into effect by President Bill Clinton in 1993. This legislation requires state governments to
allow for registration by qualifying voters whenever they apply for or renew their driver's license,
thereby consolidating the driver's application and voter registration processes. Simply make it known
to personnel at the Office of Motor Vehicles that you wish to register to vote when you apply for a
license or a renewal of your driver's license.

You may also pick up a mail-in voter's registration form from your local OMV. Please verify the form
for accuracy and sign it in the space provided before it is turned in or mailed.

If you choose to register to vote while at the OMV, your application will be submitted electronically to
the Louisiana Secretary of State. If you do not receive confirmation within two (2) weeks, please
contact your local Voter Registrar's Office.

                                    For more information concerning your right to vote and the procedures for
                                    becoming a registered voter, contact your nearest Voter Registrar's Office
                                    or visit the website of the Louisiana Secretary of State at www.sos.la.gov .

HIGHWAY TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
MAKE UP OF A COMPLEX SYSTEM
Today's society has become very mobile. The Highway Transportation System (HTS), a vast network
of highways, streets and roads, has been built to accommodate the public and private vehicles that
provide this mobility. The HTS is only about 100 years old. In 1902, only about 2300 cars were on the
road and there was only about 150 miles of paved road. However, there were more than 17 million
horses using the roadways. Now, there are about 230 million registered vehicles with 4 million miles
of paved roads and horse travel has become a leisure activity. The goal of the HTS is to provide safe,
rapid and efficient transportation of persons and goods to a desired destination, in an environmentally
safe and sound fashion. From pedestrians to the largest transport vehicles, this system is shared by
all. A multitude of safety professionals at the local, regional, and national levels are involved in
legislating and providing a safe and efficient transportation environment. Each individual road user is
the core of the safe and efficient operation of the HTS. The responsibility of each individual is to
respect the rules of the system and cooperate with others.

As a nation, we rely on our vehicles for our daily needs. We spend at least half as much time stuck in
traffic each year as we do going on annual vacations. No matter where you live, commutes to school
or work are getting longer and more snarled with traffic. Roadways have become the number one
choice of moving people and goods. Trucks deliver food and other items to stores for us to buy and
use. Sixty percent of freight is transported on the roads. Emergency vehicles such as fire trucks and
police cars respond to emergencies by way of roads. Yet for all the advantages of motorized
transportation, there is a big price to pay. Motor vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death
among people ages 1-34 and the leading cause of injury for all age groups (in the US). And through it
all, Americans love their cars and the freedom they offer.

America's system is one of the largest systems in the world with four million miles of public roads and
roughly 594,000 bridges. Transit systems operate approximately 226,400 directional route miles, of
which 216,620 are non-rail and 9,800 are rail route miles. Local governments own 75 percent of the
nearly four million-mile roadway network, about half of the nation's bridges and manage 90 percent of
the transit systems. Seventy-five percent of highway miles are in rural areas. The Highway
Transportation System exists to provide a safe and efficient mechanism to move people and goods
from one location to another. It is a complex system with many diverse elements.

THREE MAIN COMPONENTS
The Highway Transportation System consists of three major components:
People ­ This consists of several different groups, including the drivers and passengers in the
vehicles, pedestrians, construction workers, police officers, emergency personnel and children at
play.
Vehicles - Many types of vehicles utilize the HTS including; cars, trucks, vans, SUVs, large
commercial trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, mopeds, farm vehicles, emergency
vehicles, construction vehicles, bicycles, military vehicles, and pedestrians.
Roads - Many types of roads make up the HTS including; interstates, U.S. highways, state
highways, county roads, toll roads and parkways.

The Highway Transportation System is an IMPORTANT system to our way of life and to our economy
in allowing:
* personal and individual transportation
* freedom to come and go as we wish
* going to work, to shop, to school
* social and recreation activities
* choice and length of vacations

The HTS is important to the economy of our nation relative to:
manufacture of motor vehicles
building and maintenance of highways
motor carriers as transporters of goods, gasoline and tire industries
travel and recreation industry
automobile maintenance and repair industry

MANAGEMENT OF THE HIGHWAY TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
There are six means of management of the Highway Transportation System:
1. The Department of Motor Vehicles regulates drivers licenses, truck weights and operators, license
plates, fees: registration, taxes, and titles to name a few of the items this branch of government
controls.
2. Law enforcement agencies such as local city police, the highway patrol, and sheriff's departments
as well as other enforcement agencies work together to help maintain safe travel.
3. The traffic courts located in various locals in the country help to assure proper enforcement of the
law.
4. Engineering works in two ways. Highway engineering works to make our HTS the safest system in
the world and vehicle engineering works to make vehicles safer and easier to operate.
5. The emergency response system and trauma centers in the U.S. work to reduce the losses caused
by collisions both at the time of the crash and afterwards.
6. By educating the public with the use of public service announcements, high school driver education
programs, truck driving schools, substance abuse instruction, and private driver education schools,
individuals can be better prepared and informed regarding the HTS. The goal of educating the public
is to impart knowledge of the rules of the road; the basic skills involved in vehicle operation, and instill
and reinforce attitudes consistent with safe driving. An educated and informed public will produce
safer drivers and measurably lower crash rates.

TRAFFIC COLLISION COSTS
Vehicular collisions lead to tremendous social and economic costs. When someone is killed in a car
crash, a whole range of people from family members to friends and acquaintances feel the terrible
loss. Economically, in addition to lost wages, crash injuries contribute to expenses for medical care,
emergency services, nursing-home care, rehabilitation, home modifications, insurance administration
and property damage that amount to billions of dollars each year.
However, the biggest price society pays for transportation collisions is personal. Lives can change in
an instant. Just imagine how parents feel when they get a phone call telling them that their child has
been injured or killed in a vehicle collision. Traffic collisions have become the number one cause of
teenage deaths. In traffic, we judge ourselves by how safe the system is by the number of collisions
and deaths per 100 million miles traveled. We are currently near 1.6 deaths per 100 million miles
traveled. This is down from 4.7 deaths, 40 years ago. Most of this decrease is due to seat belts,
airbags, and improved safety features in vehicles. Loosely translated this means that about 44,000
people die on our highway system each year. Millions more are injured and we spend hundreds of
billions on this issue. The current statistics indicate that traffic collisions have become an epidemic. If
automobile crashes were an illness, the CDC would be trying to figure out a cure.
· In 2011, there were more than 32,367 highway fatalities nationally. On a positive note, this number
of traffic fatalities was down to the lowest since 1949 despite the fact that the number of miles driven
by Americans has gone up.
· More than 2.3 million drivers and passengers were treated in emergency rooms as the result of
being injured in motor vehicle crashes in 2009.
· The total economic cost of motor vehicle crashes in 2000 was $231 billion. This is equal to $820 for
every person living in the U.S. Lost market productivity accounted for $61 billion, while property
damage accounted for $59 billion. Medical expenses totaled $33 billion and travel delay accounted
for $26 billion.

The Louisiana Department of Public Safety and Corrections has identified the five leading causes of
motor vehicles crashes in Louisiana (2010) as:
1. Careless, and/or Reckless Operation
2. Failure to Yield
3. Following Too Closely
4. Speeding
5. Unknown/Unspecified
In 2010 fatalities, injuries, and property damage in Louisiana as a result of motor vehicle crashes cost
on average each licensed driver in Louisiana $1855.00. Each year, the current statistics can be
obtained from http://datareports.lsu.edu/.

The HTS is often crowded. In the U.S., 88% of the population has a driver's license which translates
to approximately 202 million drivers. At times 194 million drivers are on the roads in addition to 55
million pedestrians and bicyclists using the HTS. Add to this, no two users will be the same and the
amount of variables is staggering. Each driver, pedestrian and bicyclist will all have different
perspectives, needs and emotions as they operate on the roadways and use this system. With all of
this traffic, it is inevitable for drivers and pedestrians to make mistakes and drive recklessly. That is
why it is important to be able to anticipate and learn to cope with unsafe practices of others.

As you utilize the Highway Transportation System you will notice a wide variety of vehicles upon the
roadways. Each of these vehicles has different handling, braking, speed control and performance
capabilities. Another factor in how the vehicle performs is the condition of the vehicle. The equipment
it has, the age of the vehicle and whether or not regular maintenance has been performed on the
vehicle all affect its handling.

The drivers of each of these vehicles want safe, rapid and efficient use of the system. The size and
speed of these vehicles sharing the same system can create real problems. All of these factors can
affect the way you drive. Understanding the difference in the types of vehicles and how each
performs is important to you as a driver. While you may never drive a large commercial truck or a
motorcycle, understanding other vehicles' capabilities is as important to you as knowing the traffic
laws.

People who drive at unsafe speeds are a major hazard, particularly on freeways and expressways.
This does not necessarily mean that these people are driving too fast. They may be driving under the
posted speed limit, yet still too fast for existing weather, traffic conditions, or even their own physical
health.

NUMBER AND TYPES OF HIGHWAYS
There are many different types of highways throughout the highway transportation system. The
design of the highway is based on the anticipated volume and composition of the traffic utilizing the
highway. This includes the lane width, shoulder width and type and width of the median area.
· Parish Road: A parish road is a road that is regulated and maintained by a certain parish.
· State Highway: A highway that is regulated by the state. Example - LA 1.
· U.S. Highway: A nationally regulated highway that is a predecessor to the Interstate Highway
program that was adopted in 1926. Highways like US 1 and US 6 are examples.
· Interstate Highways: These highways were created by Dwight D. Eisenhower in the 50's. These
are expressways that crisscross the country that carry large volumes of traffic. EVEN numbered
highways go East and West. ODD numbered highways go North and South.
· Expressways: A national term that high volume roads are called. They are divided highways with at
least 4 lanes; most in the country are commissioned as Interstates.
· Freeways: Same as expressways. This term is used out west, especially in California.
· Toll ways: A highway that collects tolls. Usually from tollbooths a couple miles apart on a highway.
· Turnpikes: Another type of a toll way. The main difference is that these roads collect tolls using a
ticket system. You get a ticket when you get on the highway and you pay the ticket when you get off.
The Pennsylvania Turnpike is the first modern turnpike in the country. Other examples are the
Massachusetts turnpike, and the now defunct Connecticut Turnpike.
· Parkway: A divided highway that has lots of trees and plants around, usually very beautiful and
scenic highways.
· Divided Highways: Highways with lanes going in the opposite directions divided by a median or
some sort of barrier between them.
· Other names for Divided Highways: Skyways, Bee Lines, and Toll Roads
· Limited Access Highway: A highway where access is limited to signed exits.
· Partial Access Highways: A highway that allows access at other streets, probably at a stop light,
though driveways and other forms of access are not allowed.
· Full Access Highways: Any road that is divided has driveways and any other type of access
allowed.

Early American roads were built along trails. Most were designed with little or no thought for the
future. Now engineers are carefully designing and thinking of routes that best fit everyone. The need
for better and safer roads is a challenge for highway engineers. The engineers must design roads
using scientific principles and standards. They have a large responsibility to ensure the safety of
vehicles on the highways. Newer highways are designed with wider shoulders, gentle curves and
grades in an effort to reduce the number of crashes. Reduction of roadside obstacles is necessary to
reduce the severity of the injury if a vehicle leaves the highway.

IMPACT OF ROAD CONDITIONS ON DRIVING

Road conditions play a major role in the safe operation of vehicles. Good pavement conditions are
important for traction and stopping quickly. When roadways are well-maintained, drivers have a better
chance of staying on the roadway. Swerving to avoid potholes, staying out of ruts and watching for
shoulder drop offs are all hazards drivers face on poorly maintained roadways.
Weather can also impact the road conditions. Rain, even a drizzle, can cause a vehicle's tires to lose
traction. Too much water on the road can cause a vehicle's tires to start skimming on the surface of
the water instead of gripping the road. This condition is called hydroplaning. To help eliminate this
hazard engineers design roadways to carry the water away quickly and construct the face of the
pavement with grooves and rough texture to help tires maintain better traction and avoid skids.

Another recent innovation is electronic signs that post warnings about hazardous conditions such as
fog, high winds or ice storms. In areas of the country where snow is common, engineers are
designing roads that have areas beside them for snow storage. The snowplow comes through and
pushes the snow to the curb or edge of the road.
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) is a federal agency that has the chief responsibility of
improving roadway safety. The FHWA makes efforts to educate the public about roadway safety and
find ways to reduce the number of fatalities on the highway.

To drive safely on the HTS you must follow many rules and laws. As you observe these rules you
must know what traffic lights and signs mean. Traffic lights, signs and "right of way" devices and rules
tell you what to do or when to stop at an intersection. These devices can be defined by color, shape,
and information contained in them. You should always pay attention to traffic regulation devices used
in the HTS as they are an important aspect of driving. Safety features have been added to the
highways in an effort to reduce collisions. Retro reflective signs and pavement markings help
nighttime drivers. Forgiving roadside hardware such as breakaway poles and guard rails, skid
resistant pavement and all weather pavement markings also help minimize the severity of collisions.
Rumble strips alert the driver that he is veering off the road or heading into a different lane.
Intersections are a hazard to drivers. About 40 percent of all crashes occur at intersections. Efforts to
improve intersections include exclusive turn lanes, roundabouts and synchronized traffic signals.

Remember that as a driver you are part of the HTS. As part of the system you have driving
responsibilities to protect yourself and your passengers. You also have a responsibility towards other
drivers, pedestrians, and personal property. Safely sharing the roadway is essential for avoiding
crashes. The most important factor in the regulation of the highway transportation system is the driver
who obeys traffic laws and follows the "golden rule" of driving to treat others the way you would want
to be treated.

SHARING THE ROAD WITH BICYCLES
Louisiana Revised Statute 32:199 states that "all children under the age of 12, when operating a
bicycle or is a passenger on a bicycle, must wear an approved helmet with head straps when on a
public highway, bicycle path or other public right-of-way."

Bicycling is a healthy form of recreation for many people, while for others it is a form of transportation.
As a result of rising auto, gas, and insurance costs, many individuals are turning to bicycles as an
alternative method of transportation. There are currently 90,000,000 cyclists in the US. Bicycles have
the same rights to use public roads as automobiles and must follow the same traffic laws as other
vehicles. Many drivers find it hard to know how to react to bicyclists riding in the street. In any given
year there are 800-1000 bicyclists that die on the roadways and some 500,000 will be treated for
injuries. For the safety of both drivers and bicyclists, the following precautions should be taken while
driving and bicycling.

Driving Safely Near Bicyclists

Approaching and passing bicyclists:
· You must yield to bicyclists in intersections as you would for
pedestrians and other vehicles.
· Increase following distances behind bicyclists because
bicycle-stopping distances are shorter than automobiles.
· Be aware that bicyclists not traveling in the extreme right of
the lane may be trying to avoid gravel, debris, bad pavement,
sewer grates and other obstacles.
· Be cautious of bicyclists moving legally into the center of the
lane because of road hazards or into the left lane because of
a left turn.
· Avoid passing between a bicyclist and an oncoming vehicle on a two-way road. Slow down and
allow the on-coming vehicle to pass. Then move to the left to allow plenty of room to safely pass the
bicyclist.
· A three foot distance must be present between the passing automobile and slower traveling
bicyclists.
· Give bicyclists the entire lane when they are passing parked cars. They need the space to avoid
opening doors.
· Use caution when passing bicyclists because the air current created by a passing vehicle may
cause bicyclists to have an accident.
· If you are pulling a trailer, allow for extra passing room when passing bicyclists.
· Extra caution should be used when motorists are near bicyclists in wet, windy, or icy weather.
· Reduce speed when encountering bicyclists and never tailgate.
· Do not blow your horn when near bicyclists.

Turning near bicyclists:

· Drivers who are turning left must wait until oncoming bicyclists pass. Accidents occur when turning
drivers do not notice the bicyclists in the flow of traffic or misjudge their speed.
· Do not swing in front of a bicyclist to make a right turn. Making a right turn after overtaking a bicyclist
is also a cause of accidents. Drivers should slow down and stay behind the
bicyclist, or look once, then again. Make sure you see the bicycle and know
its speed before you turn.
· Speeds of bicycles are hard to judge. They can vary from under 10 mph to
over 35 mph. Good communication and eye contact between drivers and
bicyclists are needed to prevent accidents.

Watch for bicyclists and use caution in hazardous conditions:

· When opening your car door into traffic, look first for bicyclists.
This collision is the driver's fault.
· Railroad crossings can cause bicyclists to slow down and
possible zigzag in order to cross the tracks.
· Metal or grated surfaces may cause a bicycle to be less stable than a car. Bicyclists should slow
down and move to the center of the lane to allow room for handling the uneven surface. Drivers
should be prepared for the reaction of a bicyclist who may be less experienced and may swerve to
correct for the new surface.
· Trucks creating windblasts can move a bicyclist out of his path of travel on long open highways and
bridges.
· Children on bicycles may not be aware of their surroundings. Drivers should be aware that the
children may make sudden movements or change direction. Don't expect children to know traffic
laws.
· Inclement weather conditions create high winds and slippery surfaces that can cause extreme
problems for bicyclists. Because these conditions create stability problems for all vehicles, drivers
should allow more following distance for bicyclists.

 Bicycling Safety:
      Always wear a helmet.
      Use hand signals and eye contact to communicate your
         actions with other drivers.
      Obey the instructions of official traffic control signals and
         signs just like a motor vehicle.
      Ride on the right hand side of the road with traffic. If
         you are making a left hand turn, ride on the left side of
         the turn lane. You may ride in the center of the lane to
         avoid hazards.
      Be predictable by riding in a straight line and following
         traffic laws.
      Yield to pedestrians on crosswalks and on sidewalks.
      When riding at night, bicycles must have a white front light and a red rear light or reflector
         visible from the rear.
      Carry no more persons than the number for which the bicycle is designed and equipped.
      Two cyclists may ride side-by-side, but it is safer to ride single file.
      Attach a rear view mirror so you can check traffic over your shoulder.

SHARING THE ROAD WITH MOTORCYCLES

As the price of gasoline increases, more of your friends, relatives, and neighbors are becoming
motorcycle riders. However, many drivers still have not adjusted to motorcycles appearing in traffic.
Traveling by motorcycle is appealing to some people; they are fuel and space efficient and can be
just plain fun to ride.
But there is a flip side. Motorcyclists are more vulnerable to injury than a driver of a larger vehicle if
involved in a crash. Research shows that over two-thirds of the
car/motorcycle collisions are the results of the other driver
turning in front of a motorcyclist. Motorcyclists and
cars/trucks need to mix in traffic without causing harm to
each other. Motorcycles present a narrow silhouette and are
usually much shorter in length than an automobile. The small
profile of the motorcycle may make it appear farther away
and traveling slower than it actually is. Remember that
motorcyclists are often hidden in a vehicle's blind spot or
missed in a quick look due to their smaller size. Because it is
difficult to judge the motorcycle's distance and speed, car
drivers need to take a second look, and then a third. Its small
size also makes it more difficult to spot in traffic than another
car. Some motorcyclists take advantage of their small size
and maneuverability. They may cut between cars and put
themselves in places where drivers cannot see them.

Be alert for a motorcycle to appear unexpectedly.
Due to a motorcycle's size, its position within a lane of traffic will change as traffic conditions change.
The motorcyclist should position himself in the lane to see and be seen. This often means riding in
the left portion of the traffic lane to allow a better view of traffic and road situations. It also makes the
motorcycle more visible to other traffic. However, as traffic and road conditions change, the rider may
move. This move could be to the center of the lane or even to the right side to avoid traffic or to be
seen by others on the road.

Most drivers take for granted the ability of their vehicles to handle minor road hazards such as
potholes, strong winds or railroad tracks. Minor problems for the four-wheeled vehicle can be major
problems for motorcycles. The cyclist will change position within the lane to increase the distance
from potential hazards. These lateral movements sometimes occur suddenly. Motorists need to be
alert for these sudden changes in position and direction, and drive accordingly. Respect the vehicle
space of a motorcycle and its position in traffic. Motorcycles are allowed the full width of a lane in
which to maneuver. Refrain from sharing a lane with a motorcycle. It restricts the rider's ability to
avoid hazardous situations.

Because a motorcycle has the right to a full traffic lane, pass it just as you would another vehicle.
Don't pass too fast or too close. The wind blast of large, fast moving vehicles can blow a motorcycle
out of control.

Intersections are the most likely place for car/motorcycle collisions to occur. This usually is the result
of a car driver NOT SEEING the motorcycle and turning into the motorcycle's path. Misinterpreting a
cyclist's intentions can also lead to problems. A cyclist will change lane position to prepare for
upcoming traffic conditions. The cyclist will move to one side of the lane in preparation for a turn or
possibly to move away from a hazard unseen by other motorists. Do not assume the cyclist's
intention until the maneuver is unmistakably started, such as a turn into an intersection or driveway.
Also, turn signals may not automatically shut off on a motorcycle and cyclists occasionally forget to
cancel them after a turn is completed. Make sure you know what the cyclist is going to do before you
move into the motorcycle's path.
When driving behind a motorcycle, allow at least a four (4)-second following distance. This provides
the cyclist enough room to maneuver or stop in an emergency. Due to its vulnerable nature and the
difficulty motorists have in judging a motorcycle's speed and distance, space between the two
vehicles should be increased to avoid sudden braking. Both cyclists and drivers are more likely to
make incorrect decisions if there is not enough stopping distance or ability to see and react to
conditions. This leads to collisions. A cyclist's chances of injury are greater if forced to avoid
obstacles ahead, as well as a driver following too closely. Remember that tailgating a motorcycle in
your car is comparable to an 18-wheeler tailgating you!

The single headlight and single tail light of a motorcycle can blend into the lights of other vehicles.
This can cause you to misjudge distance. Always dim your headlights for a motorcycle just as
required for other vehicles.
    SHARING THE ROAD WITH BIG TRUCKS

        It takes special driving skills and knowledge to drive safely around big trucks. You cannot drive
        around a big truck the way you drive around other vehicles. The most important tip is to give a wide
        clearance (berth) to the big truck. Collisions between large trucks and lighter vehicles frequently
        result in death in the driver or occupants of the "other vehicles."

        Big trucks are different because they have a much longer stopping distance than other vehicles,
and longer still on wet roads. The ability of the truck driver to control the truck during emergency braking
is very limited. A tractor trailer loaded with freight, safe-rated tire, and properly adjusted brakes traveling
at 55 miles per hour on a clear, dry roadway requires a minimum of 290 feet to come to a complete
stop. Also, truck drivers cannot see you nearly as well as you can see the truck, and if there is a crash,
YOU LOSE. In crashes involving large trucks and automobiles, the occupants of the cars sustain 78%
of the fatalities. In more than 70% of these fatal crashes involving cars and commercial vehicles, police
report that the car driver contributed to the cause of the crash.

Drivers of smaller vehicles need to practice the following safety tips:
      As a general rule, keep as much space as possible between your vehicle and big trucks.
      Do not cut in front of a truck just because you see open space there. That space is the truck's
          cushion of safety because of its longer stopping distance. If you have to stop suddenly, it will be
          very difficult for the truck to avoid hitting you. Also, if the truck has a long hood, the driver may not
          be able to see you at all.
      Do not linger alongside a truck; you may be in the trucker's blind spot. The size and
          configuration of many trucks, especially those with trailers, create large blind spots for the truck
          driver. If you cannot see a truck driver's face in one of his mirrors, the driver cannot see you and
          probably does not know you are there.
      If you are following a truck and cannot see the truck's side mirrors, you are driving too close. The
          driver cannot see you, so back off.
      Always give trucks plenty of room when they are turning. The relationship between the cab,
          mirrors, and trailer change constantly during a turn, creating varying blind spots. Also, trucks need
          extra space to turn because of their size.
      If a truck is stopped on a hill, it will roll backwards when it begins to accelerate. If you find
          yourself traveling behind a truck on a hill, leave extra space as a precaution.
      Avoid driving in the right lane, if possible, when traveling up or down hills, as well as near truck
          weigh stations, where large vehicles will be attempting to re-enter faster-moving traffic. By avoiding
          the right lane in these areas, you will reduce the possibility of a crash with a large vehicle.
      On windy days, never drive alongside a truck for longer than you need to pass it. Turbulence
          from a truck on a windy day can cause a vehicle to swerve on the road or even spin out of control
          if the weather conditions are bad enough. To minimize this, stay to the outer edge of the lane
          away from the truck and hold the wheel tightly with both hands.

Remember, trucks don't drive like cars. Generally speaking, the bigger the truck is:
 · The bigger its blind spots.
 · The more room it needs to maneuver.
 · The longer it takes to stop.
 · The longer it takes to pass it.
 · The longer it takes to accelerate.
 · The more room it takes to turn.
  · The more likely you're going to be the loser in a collision.
Following trucks
In good road and weather conditions you should leave a gap of at least four to five (4-5) seconds between
your vehicle and the truck in front of you, and an even longer gap when conditions are poor. This will
prevent road spray picked up by the truck's wheels from affecting your visibility. The truck may also block
your view of the road ahead, so hanging back will increase your field of vision and give you more stopping
distance if the truck brakes suddenly to avoid a hazard you can't see.

Because of the size of trucks, another driver's view of you may be restricted. At intersections and in slow
traffic, ensure you stay far enough away for other drivers
to see you. When following at night, keep your headlights
on low beam. The truck's many side mirrors will reflect
high beam lights right into the driver's eyes.

If you are traveling behind or beside a truck during rainy
weather you will need to watch out for splash and spray
created by the truck. Splash and spray from the road, wind,
and rain can make it difficult for you to see clearly. While
trucks are equipped with mud flaps or mudguards to reduce
the amount of debris thrown out from under their wheels, this
does not completely prevent spray being thrown out from the
sides and rear of the truck.

To maximize your safety when traveling alongside a truck in wet conditions:

  Keep your windshield clean and windshield wipers in good condition. Keep a clear view. This will help
      ensure you have the necessary field of vision.

  If you are approaching an oncoming truck, turn on your wipers before it passes you. This will
      ensure your windshield is cleaned as soon as any spray is thrown onto it. This will reduce the time
      your visibility will be obscured and reduced.

  Don't pull out to pass a truck unless you can clearly see your way forward.
  Slow down so the distance between you and the truck increases. This will get you further away from

      the spray.
  Avoid the NO-ZONE. Just like automobiles, the first rule of safety with trucks is SEE AND BE

      SEEN. Large trucks have blind spots, or No-Zones, around the front, back and sides of the truck.
      Watch out! A truck could even turn into you, because these No-Zones make it difficult for the driver
      to see. So, don't hang out in the No-Zones. Remember, if you can't see the truck driver in the truck's
      mirror, the truck driver can't see you.

             STAY OUT OF THE "NO ZONE."
 Passing
    If you are passing a truck, always pass on the left side and make sure to allow plenty of room before cutting
    back in front of the truck. Keep a firm control on the steering wheel to counter the effect of air turbulence.
    Look for the whole front of the vehicle in your rear-view mirror before pulling in front and maintaining speed.

 Merging Courtesy
    When traveling in the right lane, courtesy dictates
    that you move over to allow a truck to merge. Be
    careful when pulling behind a truck which has just
    entered the highway; it takes a lot longer for a large
    truck to get up to speed.

 Avoid Squeeze Play
    Pay close attention to large vehicles turn signals and
    give them plenty of room to maneuver. When a truck
    (or bus) needs to make a right turn, it will sometimes
    swing wide to the left in order to safely turn right and clear

    the corner of a curb or other obstruction. Sometimes
    space from other lanes is used to clear corners. If you try
    to get in between the truck (or bus) and the curb, you will
    be squeezed in between them and could suffer a serious
    crash. To avoid a crash, do not turn until the truck (or bus)
    has completed its turn.
                      Make the Call, Save Lives.

                                                                 Kevin Kimmel, truck driver for Con-way Truckload
                                                                 and winner of TAT's 2015 Harriet Tubman Award

In January 2015, an RV pulled into a truck stop in Virginia. Observant professional truck driver Kevin Kimmel recognized
suspicious activity around that RV, which had pulled back by the truck line, and decided something was off. Instead of turning a
blind eye, he made a call that brought law enforcement out to the scene within a few minutes. After interviewing the
occupants of the vehicle, they discovered that a young woman, 20 years old, had been kidnapped from Iowa two weeks prior.
She had been beaten, raped, her whole body burned by instruments heated on the RV stove, branded and starved. She was
being sold by her traffickers, Laura Sorenson and Aldair Hodza, through sex ads on Craigslist, where men were purchasing her
and then arriving at the RV to rape her. She was dying from malnutrition and the torture she was subjected to ... had the call
not been made that brought law enforcement out to that truck stop, doctors said she would have died within the next few
days. Now a recovering survivor, this young woman calls Kimmel her guardian angel. He calls himself a Trucker Against
Trafficking.

Truckers Against Trafficking is a non-profit organization that has been working with the trucking industry since 2009 to provide
the needed training and tools to enable members of the industry to both recognize human trafficking when they see it
happening and to know what actions to take to enable law enforcement to effectively fight this crime. Through this training and
these tools, truckers are becoming Everyday Heroes like
Kevin Kimmel, who was also named TAT's 2015 Harriet
Tubman Award winner.

One of the tools TAT provides is a wallet card with red flags
to look for, questions to ask if you suspect someone is a
victim and actionable information to report. This wallet card
is available by App, from the appropriate App Store, on all
smart phones, whether Android, iPhone or Windows format,
as well as by emailing tat.truckers@gmail.com, for a version
to carry in your wallet.

Additionally, TAT provides a powerful, 26-minute training video on its website (www.truckersagainsttrafficking.org), which,

when watched along with taking and passing a short test, certifies drivers as TAT-Trained, a designation which can go on your

resume. Because professional drivers often find themselves in locations frequented and exploited by human traffickers, they

are in a unique position to recognize the signs of human trafficking and to make the call that can lead to victim recovery and

perpetrator arrests.  Get your wallet card today. Be an Everyday Hero! Make the call (1-888-3737-

888); save lives!
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
                               Table of Contents  Page
                                                  i-ii
Louisiana has 5 classes of driver's license:      iii
CDL Requirements

Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 1-1
Driving Safely ................................................................................................................................... 2-1
Transporting Cargo Safely ............................................................................................... 3-1
Transporting Passengers Safely .............................................................................. 4-1
Air Brakes ............................................................................................................................................. 5-1
Combination Vehicles ............................................................................................................ 6-1
Doubles and Triples ................................................................................................................. 7-1
Tank Vehicles .................................................................................................................................. 8-1
Hazardous Materials ............................................................................................................... 9-1
School Bus ........................................................................................................................................ 10-1
Pre-Trip Inspection .................................................................................................................. 11-1
Basic Vehicle Control Skills Test............................................................................12-1
On-Road Driving......................................................................................................................... 13-1
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
Louisiana has 5 classes of driver's license:

R.S. 32:408 B.(2)(a) and 405.1:
Class "A" Commercial Driver's License - Combination Vehicles
Age Requirements: 18 years or above for intrastate and 21 years or above for interstate.
Permits the operation of all vehicles within Classes "B," "C," "D," and "E," with any appropriate
endorsements and any combination of vehicles with a gross combination weight rating of 26,001
pounds or more, provided that the gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being towed
is in excess of 10,000 pounds.
NOTE: If the pulling unit of the combination vehicle is 26,000 pounds or less, a restriction (55
- No 18-wheelers) must be added to the license. If the vehicle is not connected with a fifth
wheel connection, a "no tractor trailer" restriction will be added.

R.S. 32:408 B.(2)(b) and 405.1:
Class "B" Commercial Driver's License - Heavy Straight Vehicle
Age Requirements: 18 years or above for intrastate and 21 years or above for interstate.
Permits the operation of any vehicle within Classes "C," "D," and "E," with any appropriate
endorsement(s) plus any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of twenty-six thousand
and one or more pounds, or any such vehicle towing a vehicle not in excess of 10,000 pounds
gross vehicle weight rating. A "straight vehicle" is defined for the purpose of this class as being one
that does not bend or have a moveable joint in its frame between the driver seat and the cargo or
passenger compartment.

R.S. 32:408 B.(2)(c) and 405.1:
Class "C" Commercial Driver's License - Light Vehicle
Age Requirements: 18 years or above for intrastate and 21 years or above for interstate.
Permits the operation of any vehicle within Classes "D" and "E", with any appropriate
endorsement(s), plus any single vehicle less than 26,001 pounds GVWR, or such vehicle towing a
vehicle not in excess of 10,000 pounds GVWR. This group includes vehicles designed to transport
16 or more passengers, including the driver, and which are not within the definition of a Group "A"
or "B" vehicle, and vehicles used in the transportation of placarded amounts of hazardous
materials.

R.S. 32:408 B.(2)(d) and 405.1:
Class "D" Chauffeurs Driver's License
Age Requirements: 17 years or above.
Permits the operation of all vehicles included in Class "E" plus any single motor vehicle used in
commerce to transport passengers or property if the motor vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating
of 10,001 or more pounds but less than 26,001 pounds, or any combination of vehicles used in
commerce to transport passengers or property if the vehicle has a combined vehicle weight rating
of 10,001 or more pounds but less than 26,001 pounds inclusive of a towed unit with a gross
vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds; or any vehicle designed or utilized for the
transportation of passengers for hire or fee; and not utilized in the transportation of materials found
to be hazardous under the provisions of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act which requires
the vehicle to bear a placard under the provision of Hazardous Materials Regulations (49 CFR Part
172, Subpart F).

                                                        i
R.S. 32:408 B.(2)(e) and 405.1:
Class "E" Driver's License - Personal Vehicle
Age Requirements: 17 years or above.
Permits the operation of any single motor vehicle under 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, any
personal use recreational vehicle and farm vehicles controlled and operated by a farmer to
transport agricultural products, farm machinery, or farm supplies to and from a farm within 150 air
miles of the owner's or operator's farm (not used in operation of a Common or Contract Carrier, and
not used to transport passengers or property for hire) or any other vehicle which is not used in the
transportation of hazardous materials which is required to be placarded. No first-time application for
a Louisiana Class "E" license shall be received from any person seventeen (17) years of age or
older unless there is also submitted with the application written evidence of the successful
completion by the applicant of a full thirty-six (36) hour driver's education course or of an approved
six (6) hour "pre-licensing" training course which was approved by the Louisiana Department of
Public Safety & Corrections. The applicant shall provide a signed statement to the department
attesting that he has completed a minimum of fifty (50) hours of supervised driving practice with a
licensed parent, guardian, or adult at least twenty one (21) or older. At least fifteen (15) of these
hours must be night time driving. New applicants transferring in with an out-of-state, foreign, or
military license are exempt from this requirement. In addition, this requirement shall not apply to
those seventeen (17) years of age if they do not live within twenty-five (25) miles of a location which
provides such course.

Note: The mentioned classes do not include the operation of motorcycles and motorscooters
except as an endorsement to the basic license.

ENDORSEMENTS:
R.S. 32:408 (3)
The following endorsements are possible to the classes of Commercial Driver's Licenses:
"T" Double/Triple Trailers
"P" Passenger
"N" Tank Vehicles
"H" Hazardous Materials * (issued only to persons 21 years of age or above)*
"X" Combination Tank Vehicles and Hazardous Materials
"M" Motorcycle
"S" School Bus

                                                        ii
                                         CDL REQUIREMENTS

INITIAL ISSUANCE:
    Valid picture driver's license
    Supplemental Application Form (DPSMV 2211 R 5/14) ­ Enclosure A
    Current, complete Physical Examination (DPSMV 2032 (R 04/04)) or its
       equivalent
    Proof of liability insurance on personally owned vehicle/s
    Proof of Social Security number
    Proof of Louisiana residency
    Application fee is $15 due at the time of application
    Upon passing required test/s, applicant will be issued a 180 day learner's
       permit.
    Applicant is required to make an appointment with a CDL Third Party Examiner
       for administration of the skills test (pre-trip inspection, basic controls and road
       driving). A list of CDL Third Party Examiner's is available at any Office of Motor
       Vehicles location.
    Upon successful completion of the skills test, the Examiner will advise when to
       go back to Motor Vehicles to be issued the CDL.

   CDL RENEWALS:
      CDL driver's license
      Proof of Louisiana residency
      Current, complete Physical Examination (DPSMV 2032 (R 04/04)) or it's
         equivalent
      Proof of liability insurance on personally owned vehicle/s
      Testing is required for renewal of Hazardous Materials endorsement. Hazmat
         testing is conducted at any Office of Motor Vehicle issuing office.
      Fingerprint background check must be within most recent 180 days.
         (www.hazprints.com)

   Questions:
   1-225-925-6146 or www.expresslane.org

                                                          iii
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 1                                          Class A Combination Vehicles. Any combination
       INTRODUCTION                                           of vehicles with gross combination weight rating
                                                              (GCWR) of 26,001 or more pounds falls in Group A
This Section Covers                                           provided the GVWR of the vehicle(s) being towed is
                                                              more than 10,000 pounds. Most Class A vehicles
 Commercial Driver License Tests                              are trucks such as truck-tractor/semi-trailer or truck
 Medical Requirements                                         and trailer combinations. However, tractor-trailer
 Driver Disqualifications                                     buses may be found in a few communities. Driving a
 Other Safety Rules                                           Class A vehicle requires considerably more skill and
 International Registration Program                           knowledge than driving vehicles in Classes B and C.
                                                              Since these skills include those required to drive a B
There is a federal requirement that each state have           and C vehicle, a driver who has a Class A license
minimum standards for the licensing of commercial             also may drive vehicles in Classes B and C.
drivers.
                                                              Class B Heavy Straight Vehicles. Any single
This manual provides driver license testing                   vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 or more pounds falls
information for drivers who wish to have a                    in Group B, or any such vehicle towing another
commercial driver license (CDL). This manual does             vehicle not in excess of 10,000 pounds GVWR.
NOT provide information on all the federal and                Class B includes straight trucks and large buses,
state requirements needed before you can drive a              including articulated buses. Safely driving these
commercial motor vehicle (CMV). You may have to               heavy vehicles requires considerably more
contact your state driver licensing authority for             knowledge and skill than driving the small trucks
additional information.                                       and buses found in Class C. Since they include the
                                                              skills required to drive Class C vehicles, drivers who
You must have a CDL to operate:                               have qualified for a Class B license may also drive
                                                              vehicles in Class C.
Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) of 26,001 pounds or more.                       Class C Small Vehicles. Any single vehicle with a
                                                              GVWR less than 26,001 pounds falls in Group C, or
A combination vehicle with a gross combination                any such vehicle towing another vehicle not in
weight rating (GCWR) of 26,001 or more pounds,                excess of 10,000 pounds GVWR. However,
provided the GVWR of the vehicle(s) being towed is            vehicles of this size are included in the CDL
in excess of 10,000 pounds.                                   program only if they are: 1) Designed to carry 16 or
                                                              more passengers including the driver, or (2) Used to
A vehicle designed to transport 16 or more                    transport hazardous materials in quantities requiring
passengers (including the driver).                            placarding under the Hazardous Materials
                                                              Regulations (49 CFR Part 172, Subpart F) or is
Any size vehicle which requires hazardous material            carrying material listed as a select agent or toxin in
placards or is carrying material listed as a select           42 CFR part 73.
agent or toxin in 42 CFR part 73. Federal
regulations through the Department of Homeland                There are a great variety of vehicles in Class C.
Security require a background check and                       Some rather large Class C vehicles may require
fingerprinting for the Hazardous Materials                    more skill and knowledge to operate than do the
endorsement. Contact your local department of                 smaller ones. However, the licensing category is
driver licensing for more information.                        based principally on the type of cargo carried.
                                                              Because of the seriousness of an accident involving
(Your state may have additional definitions of                hazardous material or human passengers, the safe
CMVs.)                                                        operation of even the smaller vehicles in Class C
                                                              requires special knowledge and the drivers of these
                                                              vehicles must have a CDL.

CDL Classifications                                           STATE OPTIONS: Some states may include more
                                                              drivers and vehicles in their CDL programs. For
The CDL vehicle classification included in the                example, in some states, a CDL may be required
federal standard, together with the type of cargo to          for buses designed to carry fewer than 16
be transported, determine what type of CDL                    passengers. Going beyond the federal standard is
license and endorsement an applicant must apply               acceptable and the state will need to decide which
for. There are three basic vehicle classes or                 battery of tests applies to these drivers, or develop
groups:                                                       a new battery.

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-1
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

CDL Endorsements & Restrictions                               Hazardous Materials (H). Any driver, regardless of
                                                              the vehicle Class/Group (A, B, or C) who wishes to
Endorsements                                                  haul any material that has been designated as
                                                              hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to
All commercial drivers who drive certain types of             be placarded under subpart F of 49 CFR part 172;
vehicles or haul certain types of cargo must add              or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent
endorsements to their CDL license and/or                      or toxin 42 CFR Part 73 must add a hazardous
Commercial Learner's Permit (CLP) to show that                materials endorsement to their CDL. S/he must
they have the specialized knowledge required for              pass a special written examination on how to
these operations. There are six kinds of CDL                  recognize, handle, and transport hazardous
endorsements that may be required, depending on               materials.
the vehicle or type of cargo.
                                                              The Transportation Security Administration (TSA)
NOTE: The only endorsements that may be                       and the US Department of Transportation require
added to a Commercial Learner's Permit (CLP)                  background checks on commercial drivers who are
are:                                                          certified to transport hazardous materials. The
                                                              background checks include a review of criminal,
     - Passenger (P);                                         immigration and FBI records. If the driver is found
                                                              to represent a security threat, TSA will notify the
     - School bus (S); and                                    person and the state will deny issuance of an
                                                              endorsement.
     - Tank vehicle (N).
                                                              Combination Hazardous Materials and Tank
Double and Triple Trailers (T). Many drivers who              Vehicle (X). Drivers of tank vehicles who haul
are qualified to drive Class A vehicles may wish to           hazardous materials or waste in amounts requiring
pull double or triple trailers. Research shows that           placards must add an X endorsement to their CDL,
considerable additional knowledge and skill is                showing that they have passed the special
necessary to safely pull double and triple trailers in        knowledge examinations for both tank vehicles and
various traffic conditions and driving environments.          hazardous materials.
Consequently, adding the endorsement to the
licenses of Class A drivers is necessary if they wish         School Buses (S). Drivers who wish to drive a
to pull double or triple trailers. A special knowledge        school bus, must add a school bus endorsement to
examination on the problems associated with pulling           their CDL/CLP. They must pass a special
multiple trailers must be passed.                             knowledge examination on safety considerations
                                                              when transporting passengers in a school bus and
Tank Vehicle (N). Drivers of any commercial motor             must pass skills tests in a school bus. The
vehicle that is designed to transport any liquid or           endorsement applies to applicants who wish to drive
gaseous materials within a tank or tanks having an            a school bus in any class (A, B, or C).
individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons
and an aggregate rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or           In addition to these six required endorsements,
more that is either permanently or temporarily                states may add special endorsements of their
attached to the vehicle or the chassis must obtain            own as they see fit.
this endorsement. Applies to Class A, B and C (only
applicable to Class C if the vehicle is hauling               Restrictions
hazardous materials) vehicles. Liquids in bulk cause
driving control problems because the cargo is                 Restrictions may be added to Commercial Driver
heavy, prone to shifting, and has a high center of            Licenses/Permits based upon the type of vehicle
gravity. These drivers must pass a special                    and equipment that the driver uses for the Skills
knowledge examination on the problems posed by                Test. There are ten standardized restriction codes.
large volume liquid cargos to add the endorsement
to their CDL/CLP.                                             NOTE: If a CLP is issued with a Passenger (P) or a
                                                              School Bus (S) endorsement, it must also contain a
Passengers (P). Drivers who wish to drive a vehicle           (P) ­ No passengers in a CMV bus restriction.
having a design capacity to carry 16 or more
people, including the driver, must add a passenger            If a CLP is issued with a Tanker (N) endorsement, it
endorsement to their CDL/CLP. They must pass a                must also contain a (X) ­ No cargo in a CMV tank
special knowledge examination on safety                       vehicle.
considerations when transporting passengers and
must pass skills tests in a passenger vehicle. The
endorsement applies to applicants who wish to drive
a bus in any class (A, B, or C).

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-2
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

(E) - No manual transmission. If an applicant                 (P) - No passengers in CMV bus: A CLP holder
performs the skills test in a vehicle equipped with an        with a P endorsement is prohibited from operating
automatic transmission, the State must indicate on            a CMV carrying passengers, other than
the CDL, if issued, that the person is restricted from        Federal/State auditors and inspectors, test
operating a CMV equipped with a manual                        examiners, other trainees, and the CDL holder
transmission. For the purposes of the skills test and         accompanying the CLP holder as prescribed by §
the restriction, an automatic transmission includes           CFR 383.25(a)(1) of this part.
any transmission not operating fully on the gear shift
and clutch principle.                                         A CLP holder with a S endorsement is prohibited
                                                              from operating a school bus with passengers,
(K) - Intrastate only: If an applicant certifies              other than Federal/State auditors and inspectors,
their status as either Non-Excepted Intrastate or             test examiners, other trainees, and the CDL holder
Excepted Intrastate, the state must indicate on the           accompanying the CLP holder as prescribed by §
CDL, if issued, that person is restricted from                CFR 383.25(a)(1) of this part.
operating a CMV in interstate commerce. States
may impose this restriction for reasons other than            (V) - Medical Variance: If the State is notified
those specified above.                                        according to § 383.73(o)(3) that the driver has
                                                              been issued a medical variance, the State must
(L) - No Air brake equipped CMV: If an                        indicate the existence of such a medical variance
applicant does not take or fails the air brake                on the CDLIS driver record and the CDL
component of the knowledge test, or performs the              document, if issued, using the restriction code ``V''
skills test in a vehicle not equipped with air brakes,        to indicate there is information about a medical
the State must indicate on the CLP or CDL, if                 variance on the CDLIS driver record.
issued, that the person is restricted from operating
a CMV equipped with any type of air brakes. For               (X) - No cargo in CMV tank vehicle: A CLP
the purposes of the skills test and the restriction,          holder with an N endorsement may only operate an
air brakes include any braking system operating               empty tank vehicle and is prohibited from operating
fully or partially on the air brake principle.                any tank vehicle that previously contained
                                                              hazardous materials that has not been purged of
(M) - No Class A passenger vehicle: If an                     any residue.
applicant applying for a passenger endorsement
performs the skills test in a passenger vehicle               (Z) - No full air brake equipped CMV: If an
requiring a Group B CDL, the State must indicate              applicant performs the skills test in a vehicle
on the CDL, if issued, that the person is restricted          equipped with air over hydraulic brakes, the State
from operating a passenger vehicle requiring a                must indicate on the CDL, if issued, that the person
Group A CDL.                                                  is restricted from operating a CMV equipped with
                                                              any braking system operating fully on the air brake
(N) - No Class A and B passenger vehicle: If an               principle. For the purposes of the skills test and
applicant applying for a passenger endorsement                the restriction, air over hydraulic brakes includes
performs the skills test in a passenger vehicle               any braking system operating partially on the air
requiring a Group C CDL, the State must indicate              brake and partially on the hydraulic brake principle.
on the CDL, if issued, that the person is restricted
from operating a passenger vehicle requiring a                Any additional jurisdictional restrictions that apply
Group A or B CDL                                              to the CLP driving privilege.

(O) - No tractor trailer CMV: If an applicant                 To Get a CDL or CLP
performs the skills test in a combination vehicle for
a Group A CDL with the power unit and towed unit              To get a CDL, you must pass knowledge and skills
connected with a pintle hook or other non-fifth               tests. This manual will help you pass the tests,
wheel connection, the State must indicate on the              however, it is not a substitute for a truck driver
CDL, if issued, that the person is restricted from            training class or program. Formal training is the
operating a tractor-trailer combination connected             most reliable way to learn the many special skills
by a fifth wheel that requires a Group A CDL.                 required for safely driving a large commercial
                                                              vehicle and becoming a professional driver in the
An applicant who passes a skills test using a                 trucking industry. Figure 1.1 helps you determine if
combination vehicle that is NOT a Truck Tractor               you need a CDL.
Semi-Trailer combination, but is otherwise
equipped with a fifth wheel, will be issued a CDL
with an "O" restriction.

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-3
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                           Figure 1.1

NOTE: A bus may be Class A, B, or C depending on whether
             the GVWR is over 26,001 pounds or is a combination
             vehicle.

Section 1 - Introduction                                         Page 1-4
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

1.1 ­ Commercial Driver License Tests                         move your vehicle forward, backward, and turn it
                                                              within a defined area. These areas may be marked
1.1.1 ­ Knowledge Tests                                       with traffic lanes, cones, barriers, or something
                                                              similar. The examiner will tell you how each control
You will have to take one or more knowledge tests,            test is to be done.
depending on what class of license and what
endorsements you need. The CDL knowledge                      On-road Test. You will be tested on your skill to
tests include:                                                safely drive your vehicle in a variety of traffic
                                                              situations. The situations may include left and right
The general knowledge test, taken by all                      turns, intersections, railroad crossings, curves, up
applicants.                                                   and down grades, single or multi-lane roads,
                                                              streets, or highways. The examiner will tell you
The passenger transport test, taken by all bus                where to drive.
driver applicants.
                                                              Figure 1.2 details which sections of this manual
The air brakes test, which you must take if your              you should study for each particular class of
vehicle has air brakes, including air over hydraulic          license and for each endorsement.
brakes.
                                                              What Sections Should You Study?
The combination vehicles test, which is required if
you want to drive combination vehicles.                           LICENSE  ENDORSEMENT
                                                                  TYPE
The hazardous materials test, required if you want
to haul hazardous materials as defined in 49 CFR                                                                               School Bus
383.5. In order to obtain this endorsement you are                                                                     Passenger
also required to pass a Transportation Security                                                                 Tank Vehicles
Administration (TSA) background check.                                                                   Double / Triple
                                                                                                    Hazardous
The tank vehicle test, required if you want to haul                                             Materials
any liquid or gaseous materials in a tank or tanks                                        Class C
having an individual rated capacity of more than                                   Class B
119 gallons and an aggregate rated capacity of                              Class A
1,000 gallons or more that is either permanently or
temporarily attached to the vehicle or chassis                Sections to Study
                                                              1XXX
The doubles/triples test, required if you want to pull
double or triple trailers.                                    2XXX            XX X

The School Bus test, required if you want to drive a          3XXX
school bus.
                                                              4                                   X
1.1.2 ­ Skills Tests
If you pass the required knowledge test(s), you can           5* X X X        X
take the CDL skills test when you are eligible. The
CDL Skills Test consists of three segments:                   6X              XX
Vehicle inspection, basic vehicle control, and on-
road driving. You must take the segments in the               7               X
order listed and must pass each one before
moving to the next. You must take these tests in              8                                X
the type of vehicle for which you wish to be
licensed. Any vehicle that has components                     9            X                   X
marked or labeled cannot be used for the CDL
Skills Test.                                                  10                                     X

Vehicle Inspection. You will be tested to see if              11 X X X                            XX
you know whether your vehicle is safe to drive.
You will be asked to do a Vehicle inspection of               12 X X X                            XX
your vehicle. You must point to/touch and name
the item you are inspecting and explain to the                13 X X X                            XX
examiner what you would inspect and why.
                                                              *Study section 5 if you plan to operate vehicles
Basic Vehicle Control. You will be tested on your             equipped with air brakes.
skill to control the vehicle. You will be asked to
                                                                             Figure 1.2 ­ What to Study

Section 1 - Introduction                                                                          Page 1-5
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

1.2 ­ Medical Documentation                                   1.2.2 ­ Inter/Intrastate Commerce: Status Non-
Requirements                                                  excepted or Excepted?

Starting January 30, 2012 and no later than                   Once you decide whether you will operate in
January 30, 2014, if you are applying for a CDL               interstate commerce or intrastate commerce,
Permit; or are renewing, upgrading, adding                    you must decide whether you will operate (or
endorsements to a CDL; or transferring a CDL                  expect to operate) in a non-excepted or excepted
from another state, you are required to provide               status. This decision will tell you to which of the
information to your State Driver's License Agency             four types of commerce you must self-certify.
(SDLA) regarding the type of commercial motor
vehicle operation you drive in or expect to drive in          Interstate Commerce:
with your CDL. Drivers operating in certain types of
commerce will be required to submit a current                 You operate in excepted interstate commerce
medical examiner's certificate and/or any medical             when you drive a CMV in interstate commerce only
variance documents that you have been issued                  for the following excepted activities:
(i.e. Vision, Skills Performance or Diabetic waivers,
or other exemptions) to your SDLA to obtain a                 To transport school children and/or school staff
"certified" medical status as part of your driving            between home and school;
record. You must contact your State Driver
Licensing Agency (SDLA) to obtain information                 As Federal, State or local government employees;
regarding the requirement for submitting these
documents.                                                    To transport human corpses or sick or injured
                                                              persons;
If you are required to have a "certified" medical
status and fail to provide and keep up-to-date your           Fire truck or rescue vehicle drivers during
medical examiner's certificate you become "not-               emergencies and other related activities;
certified" and may lose your CDL.
                                                              Primarily in the transportation of propane winter
For the purpose of complying with the new                     heating fuel when responding to an emergency
requirements for medical certification, it is                 condition requiring immediate response such as
important to know how you are using the CMV.                  damage to a propane gas system after a storm or
The following information will help you decide how            flooding;
to self-certify:
                                                              In Response to a pipeline emergency condition
1.2.1 ­ Interstate or Intrastate Commerce                     requiring immediate response such as a pipeline
                                                              leak or rupture;
Do you, or will you, use a CDL to operate a CMV in
interstate or intrastate commerce?                            In custom harvesting on a farm or to transport farm
                                                              machinery and supplies used in the custom
Interstate commerce is when you drive a CMV:                  harvesting operation to and from a farm or to
                                                              transport custom harvested crops to storage or
From one State to another State or a foreign                  market;
country;
                                                              Beekeeper in the seasonal transportation of bees;
Between two places within a State, but during part
of the trip, the CMV crosses into another State or            Controlled and operated by a farmer, but is not a
foreign country; or                                           combination vehicle (power unit and towed unit),
                                                              and is used to transport agricultural products, farm
Between two places within a State, but the cargo              machinery or farm supplies (no placardable
or passengers are part of a trip that began or will           hazardous materials) to and from a farm and within
end in another State or foreign country.                      150 air-miles of the farm;

Intrastate commerce is when you drive a CMV                   As a private motor carrier of passengers for non-
within a State and you do not meet any of the                 business purposes; or
descriptions above for interstate commerce.
                                                              To transport migrant workers.
If you operate in both intrastate commerce and
interstate commerce, you must choose interstate               If you answered yes to one or more of the above
commerce.                                                     activities as the only operation in which you drive,
                                                              you operate in excepted interstate commerce
                                                              and do not need a Federal medical examiner's
                                                              certificate.

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-6
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System   Intrastate non-excepted: I certify that I
                                                                   operate or expect to operate entirely in
If you answered no to all of the above activities,                 intrastate commerce, that I am subject to and
you operate in non-excepted interstate                             meet the medical requirements for my State;
commerce and are required to provide a current                     and that I am required to obtain a medical
medical examiner's certificate (49 CFR                             examiner's certificate.
391.45),commonly referred to as a medical
certificate or DOT card, to your State Driver                  Intrastate excepted: I certify that I operate or
Licensing Agency (SDLA). Most CDL holders who                      expect to operate entirely in intrastate
drive CMVs in interstate commerce are non-                         commerce, that I am not subject to the medical
excepted interstate commerce drivers.                              requirements for my State; and that I am not
                                                                   required to obtain a medical examiner's
If you operate in both excepted interstate                         certificate.
commerce and non-excepted interstate
commerce, you must choose non-excepted                        1.3 - CDL Disqualifications
interstate commerce to be qualified to operate in
both types of interstate commerce.                            1.3.1 ­ General

Intrastate Commerce:                                          You may not drive a commercial motor vehicle if
                                                              you are disqualified for any reason.
You operate in excepted Intrastate commerce
when you drive a CMV only in intrastate commerce              1.3.2 ­ Alcohol, Leaving the Scene of an
activities for which your State of licensure has              Accident, and Commission of a Felony
determined do not require you to meet the State's
medical certification requirements. (contact your             It is illegal to operate a CMV if your blood alcohol
SDLA about their requirements).                               concentration (BAC) is .04% or more. If you
                                                              operate a CMV, you shall be deemed to have
You operate in non-excepted intrastate                        given your consent to alcohol testing (implied
commerce when you drive a CMV only in                         consent).
intrastate commerce and are required to meet your
State of licensure's medical certification                    You will lose your CDL for at least one year for a
requirements (contact your SDLA about their                   first offense for:
requirements).
                                                              Driving a CMV if your blood alcohol concentration
If you operate in both excepted intrastate                    is .04% or higher.
commerce and non-excepted intrastate                          Driving a CMV under the influence of alcohol.
commerce, you must choose non-excepted
intrastate commerce.                                          Refusing to undergo blood alcohol testing.

1.2.3 ­ Self-Certification Statements                         Driving a CMV while under the influence of a
                                                              controlled substance.
When completing an application for your CDL, you
will be required to check the box next to the                 Leaving the scene of an accident involving a CMV.
statement that describes your status. The actual
statements on your application may vary from                  Committing a felony involving the use of a CMV.
those shown below:                                            Driving a CMV when the CDL is suspended.

 Interstate non-excepted: I certify that I                    Causing a fatality through negligent operation of a
     operate or expect to operate in interstate               CMV.
     commerce, that I am subject to and meet the
     Federal DOT medical card requirements under              You will lose your CDL for at least three years if
     49 CFR part 391; and that I am required to               the offense occurs while you are operating a CMV
     obtain a medical examiner's certificate.                 that is placarded for hazardous materials.

 Interstate excepted: I certify that I operate or             You will lose your CDL for life for a second offense.
     expect to operate in interstate commerce, but
     engage exclusively in transportation or                  You will lose your CDL for life if you use a CMV to
     operations excepted under 49 CFR §§390.3(f),             commit a felony involving controlled substances.
     391.2, 391.68 or 398.3 from all or parts of the
     qualification requirements of 49 CFR part 391;
     and that I am not required to obtain a medical
     examiner's certificate.

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-7
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

You will be put out-of-service for 24 hours if you            following six offenses at a railroad-highway grade
have any detectable amount of alcohol under                   crossing:
.04%.
                                                              For drivers who are not required to always stop,
You will be disqualified from operating a school              failing to stop before reaching the crossing if the
bus for a minimum of ten years if you refuse to               tracks are not clear.
undergo blood alcohol testing or upon a conviction
of DWI regardless of the type of vehicle driven at            For drivers who are not required to always stop,
the time of offense                                           failing to slow down and check that the tracks are
                                                              clear of an approaching train.
1.3.3 ­ Serious Traffic Violations
                                                              For drivers who are always required to stop, failing
Serious traffic violations are excessive speeding             to stop before driving onto the crossing.
(15 mph or more above the posted limit), reckless
driving, improper or erratic lane changes, following          For all drivers failing to have sufficient space to
a vehicle too closely, traffic offenses committed in          drive completely through the crossing without
a CMV in connection with fatal traffic accidents,             stopping.
driving a CMV without obtaining a CDL or having a
CDL in the driver's possession, and driving a CMV             For all drivers failing to obey a traffic control device
without the proper class of CDL and/or                        or the directions of an enforcement official at the
endorsements.                                                 crossing.

You will lose your CDL:                                       For all drivers failing to negotiate a crossing
                                                              because of insufficient undercarriage clearance.
For at least 60 days if you have committed two
serious traffic violations within a three-year period         1.3.6 ­ Hazardous Materials Endorsement
involving a CMV.                                              Background Check and Disqualifications

For at least 120 days for three or more serious               If you require a hazardous materials endorsement
traffic violations within a three-year period involving       you will be required to submit your fingerprints and
a CMV.                                                        be subject to a background check.

1.3.4 ­ Violation of Out-of-Service Orders                    You will be denied or you will lose your hazardous
                                                              materials endorsement if you:
You will lose your CDL:
                                                              Are not a lawful permanent resident of the United
[For at least 90 180 days if you have committed               States.
your first violation of an out-of-service order.
                                                              Renounce your United States citizenship.
For at least one year if you have committed two
violations of an out-of-service order in a ten-year           Are wanted or under indictment for certain felonies.
period.
                                                              Have a conviction in military or civilian court for
For at least three years if you have committed                certain felonies.
three or more violations of an out-of-service order
in a ten-year period].                                        Have been adjudicated as lacking mental capacity
                                                              or have been involuntarily committed to a mental
1.3.5 ­ Railroad-highway Grade Crossing                       health facility as specified in §1572.109.
Violations
                                                              Are considered to pose a security threat as
You will lose your CDL:                                       determined by the Transportation Security
                                                              Administration.
For at least 60 days for your first violation.
                                                              The background check procedures vary from
For at least 120 days for your second violation               jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Your licensing agency
within a three-year period.                                   will provide you with all the information you need to
                                                              complete the required TSA background check
For at least one year for your third violation within a       procedures.
three-year period.
                                                              1.3.7 ­ Traffic Violations in Your Personal
These violations include violation of a federal, state        Vehicle
or local law or regulation pertaining to one of the
                                                              The Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act
                                                              (MCSIA) of 1999 requires a CDL holder to be
                                                              disqualified from operating a commercial motor

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-8
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

vehicle if the CDL holder has been convicted of               is adjudicated as lacking mental capacity or have
certain types of moving violations in their personal          been involuntarily committed to a mental institution
vehicle.                                                      as specified in 49 CFR 1572.109; or who
                                                              renounces his or her U. S. citizenship.
If your privilege to operate your personal vehicle is
revoked, cancelled, or suspended due to violations            Your employer may not let you drive a commercial
of traffic control laws (other than parking violations)       motor vehicle if you have more than one license or
you will also lose your CDL driving privileges.               if you're CDL is suspended or revoked. A court
                                                              may fine the employer up to $5,000 or put him/her
If your privilege to operate your personal vehicle is         in jail for breaking this rule.
revoked, cancelled, or suspended due to alcohol,
controlled substance or felony violations, you will           All states are connected to one computerized
lose your CDL for 1 year. If you are convicted of a           system to share information about CDL drivers.
second violation in your personal vehicle or CMV              The states will check on drivers' accident records
you will lose your CDL for life.                              to be sure that drivers do not have more than one
                                                              CDL.
If your license to operate your personal vehicle is
revoked, cancelled, or suspended you may not                  You are not allowed to hold a mobile telephone to
obtain a "hardship" license to operate a CMV.                 conduct a voice communication or dial a mobile
                                                              telephone by pressing more than a single button
1.4 ­ Other CDL Rules                                         when driving.

There are other federal and state rules that affect           You are not allowed to send or read text messages
drivers operating CMVs in all states. Among them              while driving.
are:
                                                                  You must be properly restrained by a safety belt
You cannot have more than one license. If you                     at all times while operating a commercial motor
break this rule, a court may fine you up to $5,000                vehicle. The safety belt design holds the driver
or put you in jail and keep your home state license               securely behind the wheel during a crash,
and return any others.                                            helping the driver to control the vehicle and
                                                                  reduces the chance of serious injury or death.
You must notify your employer within 30 days of                   If you do not wear a safety belt, you are four
conviction for any traffic violations (except parking).           times more likely to be fatally injured if you are
This is true no matter what type of vehicle you                   thrown from the vehicle.
were driving.
                                                                  Your state may have additional rules that you
You must notify your motor vehicle licensing                      must also obey.
agency within 30 days if you are convicted in any
other jurisdiction of any traffic violation (except           1.5 ­ International Registration Plan
parking). This is true no matter what type of vehicle                International Fuel Tax Agreement
you were driving.
                                                              If you operate a CDL required vehicle in interstate
You must notify your employer within two business             commerce, the vehicle, with few exceptions, is
days if your license is suspended, revoked, or                required to be registered under the International
canceled, or if you are disqualified from driving.            Registration Plan (IRP) and the International Fuel
                                                              Tax Agreement (IFTA). These federally mandated
You must give your employer information on all                programs provide for the equitable collection and
driving jobs you have held for the past 10 years.             distribution of vehicle license fees and motor fuels
You must do this when you apply for a commercial              taxes for vehicles traveling throughout the 48
driving job.                                                  contiguous United States and 10 Canadian
                                                              provinces.
No one can drive a commercial motor vehicle
without a CDL. A court may fine you up to $5,000              Under the IRP, jurisdictions must register
or put you in jail for breaking this rule.                    apportioned vehicles which includes issuing
                                                              license plates and cab cards or proper credentials,
If you have a hazardous materials endorsement                 calculate, collect and distribute IRP fees, audit
you must notify and surrender your hazardous                  carriers for accuracy of reported distance and fees
materials endorsement to the state that issued                and enforce IRP requirements.
your CDL within 24 hours of any conviction or
indictment in any jurisdiction, civilian or military, for,
or found not guilty by reason of insanity of a
disqualifying crime listed in 49 CFR 1572.103; who

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-9
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Registrant responsibilities under the Plan include             (iv) is used in combination, when the gross
applying for IRP registration with base jurisdiction,               Vehicle weight of such combination exceeds
providing proper documentation for registration,                    26,000 pounds (11,793.401 kilograms).
paying appropriate IRP registration fees, properly
displaying registration credentials, maintaining              While similar, the Qualified Motor Vehicle in IFTA
accurate distance records, and making records                 means a motor vehicle used, designed, or
available for jurisdiction review.                            maintained for transportation of persons or
                                                              property and:
The basic concept behind IFTA is to allow a
licensee (motor carrier) to license in a base                   1) Having two axles and a gross vehicle weight
jurisdiction for the reporting and payment of motor                   or registered gross vehicle weight exceeding
fuel use taxes.                                                       26,000 pounds or 11,797 kilograms; or

Under the IFTA, a licensee is issued one set of                 2) Having three or more axles regardless of
credentials which will authorize operations through                   weight; or
all IFTA member jurisdictions. The fuel use taxes
collected pursuant to the IFTA are calculated                   3) Is used in combination, when the weight of
based on the number of miles (kilometers) traveled                    such combination exceeds 26,000 pounds or
and the number of gallons (liters) consumed in the                    11,797 kilograms gross vehicle or registered
member jurisdictions. The licensee files one                          gross vehicle weight. Qualified Motor
quarterly tax return with the base jurisdiction by                    Vehicle does not include recreational
which the licensee will report all operations through                 vehicles.
all IFTA member jurisdictions.
                                                                If the vehicle you operate is registered under IRP
It is the base jurisdiction's responsibility to remit           and you are a motor carrier licensed under IFTA,
the taxes collected to other member jurisdictions               then you are required to comply with the
and to represent the other member jurisdictions in              mandatory record keeping requirements for
the tax collection process, including the                       operating the vehicle. A universally accepted
performance of audits.                                          method of capturing this information is through
                                                                the completion of an Individual Vehicle Distance
An IFTA licensee must retain records to support                 Record (IVDR), sometimes times referred to as a
the information reported on the IFTA quarterly tax              Driver Trip Report. This document reflects the
return                                                          distance traveled and fuel purchased for a
                                                                vehicle that operates interstate under
The IRP registrant and the IFTA licensee may                    apportioned (IRP) registration and IFTA fuel tax
be the vehicle owner or the vehicle operator.                   credentials.

The requirement for acquiring IRP plates for a                Although the actual format of the IVDR may vary, the
vehicle and IFTA license for a motor carrier is               information that is required for proper record keeping
determined by the definitions from the IRP Plan               does not.
and the IFTA for Qualified Vehicle and Qualified
Motor Vehicle:                                                In order to satisfy the requirements for Individual
                                                              Vehicle Distance Records, these documents must
For purposes of IRP:                                          include the following information:

A Qualified Vehicle is (except as provided below)             Distance
any Power Unit that is used or
intended for use in two or more Member                        Per Article IV of the IRP Plan
Jurisdictions and that is used for the transportation             (i) Date of trip (starting and ending)
of persons for hire or designed, used, or                         (ii) Trip origin and destination ­ City and State
maintained primarily for the transportation of                    or Province
property, and:                                                    (iii) Route(s) of travel
                                                                  (iv) Beginning and ending odometer or
 (i) has two Axles and a gross Vehicle weight or                       hubometer reading of the trip
      registered gross Vehicle weight in                          (v) Total distance traveled
                                                                  (vi) In-Jurisdiction distance
 (ii) excess of 26,000 pounds (11,793.401                         (vii) Power unit number or vehicle identification
      kilograms), or                                                    number.

 (iii) has three or more Axles, regardless of weight,         Fuel
      or
                                                              Per Section P560 of the IFTA Procedures Manual
                                                              .300 An acceptable receipt or invoice must
                                                              include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-10
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

.005 Date of purchase                                         For additional information on the IRP and the
.010 Seller's name and address                                requirements related to the IRP, contact your base
.015 Number of gallons or liters purchased;                   jurisdiction motor vehicle department or IRP, Inc.
.020 Fuel type                                                the official repository for the IRP. Additional
.025 Price per gallon or liter or total amount of             information can be found on the IRP, Inc. website
                                                              at www.irponline.org. There is a training video on
      sale                                                    the website home page available in English,
.030 Unit number or other unique vehicle                      Spanish and French.

      identifier                                              For additional information on IFTA and the
.035 Purchaser's name                                         requirements related to IFTA, contact the
                                                              appropriate agency in your base jurisdiction. You
An example of an IVDR that must be completed in               will also find useful information about the
its entirety for each trip can be found in Figure 1           Agreement at the official repository of IFTA at
below. Each individual IVDR should be filled out              http://www.iftach.org/index.php.
for only one vehicle. The rules to follow when
trying to determine how and when to log an
odometer reading are the following:

      At the beginning of the day
      When leaving the state or province
      At the end of the trip/day

Not only do the trips need to be logged, but the fuel
purchases need to be documented as well. You
must obtain a receipt for all fueling and include it with
your completed IVDR.

Make sure that any trips that you enter are always
filled out in descending order and that your trips
include all state/provinces that you traveled through
on your route.

There are different routes that a driver may take,
and most of the miles may be within one state or
province. Whether or not the distance you travel is
primarily in one jurisdiction or spread among
several jurisdictions, all information for the trip
must be recorded. This includes the dates, the
routes, odometer readings and fuel purchases.
By completing this document in full and keeping all
records required by both the IRP and the IFTA, you
will have ensured that you and your company are
in compliance with all State and Provincial laws
surrounding fuel and distance record keeping
requirements.

The IVDR serves as the source document for the
calculation of fees and taxes that are payable to
the jurisdictions in which the vehicle is operated, so
these original records must be maintained for a
minimum of four years.

In addition, these records are subject to audit by
the taxing jurisdictions. Failure to maintain
complete and accurate records could result in
fines, penalties and suspension or revocation of
IRP registrations and IFTA licenses.

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-11
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                             Figure 1 ­ Individual Vehicle Mileage & Fuel Record (Example)

Section 1 - Introduction                                                                    Page 1-12
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 2                                          A vehicle defect found during an inspection could
      DRIVING SAFELY                                          save you problems later. You could have a
                                                              breakdown on the road that will cost time and
This Section Covers                                           dollars, or even worse, a crash caused by the
                                                              defect.
 Vehicle Inspection
 Basic Control of Your Vehicle                                Federal and state laws require that drivers inspect
 Shifting Gears                                               their vehicles. Federal and state inspectors also
 Seeing                                                       may inspect your vehicles. If they judge the vehicle
 Communicating                                                to be unsafe, they will put it "out of service" until it
 Space Management                                             is fixed.
 Controlling Your Speed
 Seeing Hazards                                               2.1.2 ­ Types of Vehicle Inspection
 Distracted Driving
 Aggressive Drivers/Road Rage                                 Pre-trip Inspection. A Pre-trip inspection will help
 Night Driving & Driver Fatigue                               you find problems that could cause a crash or
 Driving in Fog                                               breakdown.
 Winter Driving
 Hot Weather Driving                                          During a Trip. For safety you should:
 Railroad-highway Crossings
 Mountain Driving                                             Watch gauges for signs of trouble.
 Driving Emergencies
 Antilock Braking Systems                                     Use your senses to check for problems (look,
 Skid Control and Recovery                                    listen, smell, feel).
 Accident Procedures
 Fires                                                        Check critical items when you stop:
 Alcohol, Other Drugs, and Driving
 Staying Alert and Fit to Drive                                     Tires, wheels and rims.
 Hazardous Materials Rules                                          Brakes.
                                                                    Lights and reflectors.
This section contains knowledge and safe driving                    Brake and electrical connections to trailer.
information that all commercial drivers should                      Trailer coupling devices.
know. You must pass a test on this information to                   Cargo securement devices.
get a CDL. This section does not have specific
information on air brakes, combination vehicles,              After-trip Inspection and Report. You should do
doubles, or passenger vehicles. When preparing                an after-trip inspection at the end of the trip, day, or
for the Vehicle Inspection Test, you must review              tour of duty on each vehicle you operated. It may
the material in Section 11 in addition to the                 include filling out a vehicle condition report listing
information in this section. This section does have           any problems you find. The inspection report helps
basic information on hazardous materials (HazMat)             a motor carrier know when the vehicle needs
that all drivers should know. If you need a HazMat            repairs.
endorsement, you should study Section 9.
                                                              2.1.3 ­ What to Look For
2.1 ­ Vehicle Inspection
                                                              Tire Problems
2.1.1 ­ Why Inspect
                                                              Too much or too little air pressure.
Safety is the most important reason you inspect
your vehicle, safety for yourself and for other road          Bad wear. You need at least 4/32-inch tread depth
users.                                                        in every major groove on front tires. You need 2/32
                                                              inch on other tires. No fabric should show through
                                                              the tread or sidewall.

                                                              Cuts or other damage.

                                                              Tread separation.

                                                              Dual tires that come in contact with each other or
                                                              parts of the vehicle.

                                                              Mismatched sizes.

                                                              Radial and bias-ply tires used together.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-1
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Cut or cracked valve stems.                                   Suspension System Defects. The suspension
                                                              system holds up the vehicle and its load. It keeps
Re-grooved, recapped, or retreaded tires on the               the axles in place. Therefore, broken suspension
front wheels of a bus are prohibited.                         parts can be extremely dangerous. Look for:

Wheel and Rim Problems                                        Spring hangers that allow movement of axle from
                                                              proper position. See Figure 2.2.
Damaged rims.

Rust around wheel nuts may mean the nuts are
loose--check tightness. After a tire has been
changed, stop a short while later and re-check
tightness of nuts.

Missing clamps, spacers, studs, or lugs means
danger.

Mismatched, bent, or cracked lock rings are
dangerous.

Wheels or rims that have had welding repairs are
not safe.

Bad Brake Drums or Shoes                                      Figure 2.2

Cracked drums.                                                Cracked or broken spring hangers.
                                                              Missing or broken leaves in any leaf spring. If one-
Shoes or pads with oil, grease, or brake fluid on             fourth or more are missing, it will put the vehicle
them.                                                         "out of service", but any defect could be
                                                              dangerous. See Figure 2.3.
Shoes worn dangerously thin, missing, or broken.

Steering System Defects

Missing nuts, bolts, cotter keys, or other parts.

Bent, loose, or broken parts, such as steering
column, steering gear box, or tie rods.

If power steering equipped, check hoses, pumps,
and fluid level; check for leaks.

Steering wheel play of more than 10 degrees
(approximately 2 inches movement at the rim of a
20-inch steering wheel) can make it hard to steer.

                           Figure 2.1                         Figure 2.3
                                                              Figure 2.3
Section 2 ­ Driving Safely
Version: July 2017                                                        Page 2-2
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Broken leaves in a multi-leaf spring or leaves that           hazardous materials, you must inspect for proper
have shifted so they might hit a tire or other part.          papers and placarding.
Leaking shock absorbers.
Torque rod or arm, u-bolts, spring hangers, or                2.1.4 ­ CDL Pre-trip Inspection Test
other axle positioning parts that are cracked,
damaged, or missing.                                          In order to obtain a CDL you will be required to
Air suspension systems that are damaged and/or                pass a Vehicle Inspection test. You will be tested
leaking. See Figure 2.4.                                      to see if you know whether your vehicle is safe to
                                                              drive. You will be asked to do a vehicle inspection
                           Figure 2.4                         of your vehicle. You must point to/touch and name
Any loose, cracked, broken, or missing frame                  the item you are inspecting and explain to the
members.                                                      examiner what you would inspect and why. The
Exhaust System Defects. A broken exhaust                      following seven-step inspection method should be
system can let poison fumes into the cab or                   useful.
sleeper berth. Look for:
Loose, broken, or missing exhaust pipes, mufflers,            2.1.5 ­ Seven-step Inspection Method
tailpipes, or vertical stacks.
Loose, broken, or missing mounting brackets,                  Method of Inspection. You should do a Pre-trip
clamps, bolts, or nuts.                                       inspection the same way each time so you will
Exhaust system parts rubbing against fuel system              learn all the steps and be less likely to forget
parts, tires, or other moving parts of vehicle.               something.
Exhaust system parts that are leaking.
Emergency Equipment. Vehicles must be                         Approaching the Vehicle. Notice general
equipped with emergency equipment. Look for:                  condition. Look for damage or vehicle leaning to
Fire extinguisher(s).                                         one side. Look under the vehicle for fresh oil,
Spare electrical fuses (unless equipped with circuit          coolant, grease, or fuel leaks. Check the area
breakers).                                                    around the vehicle for hazards to vehicle
Warning devices for parked vehicles: (for example,            movement (people, other vehicles, objects, low-
three reflective warning triangles or 6 fusees or 3           hanging wires, limbs, etc.).
liquid burning flares).
Cargo (Trucks). You must make sure the truck is               Vehicle Inspection Guide
not overloaded and the cargo is balanced and
secured before each trip. If the cargo contains               Step 1: Vehicle Overview

                                                              Review Last Vehicle Inspection Report. Drivers
                                                              may have to make a vehicle inspection report in
                                                              writing each day. The motor carrier must repair any
                                                              items in the report that affect safety and certify on
                                                              the report that repairs were made or were
                                                              unnecessary. You must sign the report only if
                                                              defects were noted and certified to be repaired or
                                                              not needed to be repaired.

                                                              Step 2: Check Engine Compartment

                                                              Check That the Parking Brakes Are On and/or
                                                              Wheels Chocked.

                                                              You may have to raise the hood, tilt the cab
                                                              (secure loose things so they don't fall and break
                                                              something), or open the engine compartment door.

                                                              Check the following:

                                                              Engine oil level.

                                                              Coolant level in radiator; condition of hoses.

                                                              Power steering fluid level; hose condition (if so
                                                              equipped).

                                                              Windshield washer fluid level.

                                                              Battery fluid level, connections and tie downs
                                                              (battery may be located elsewhere)

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-3
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Automatic transmission fluid level (may require               Foot brake.
engine to be running).                                        Trailer brake (if vehicle has one).
                                                              Parking brake.
Check belts for tightness and excessive wear                  Retarder controls (if vehicle has them).
(alternator, water pump, air compressor)--learn
how much "give" the belts should have when                    Transmission controls.
adjusted right, and check each one.
                                                              Interaxle differential lock (if vehicle has one).
Leaks in the engine compartment (fuel, coolant, oil,
power steering fluid, hydraulic fluid, battery fluid).        Horn(s).

Cracked, worn electrical wiring insulation.                   Windshield wiper/washer.

Lower and secure hood, cab, or engine                         Lights.                   identification,  marker
compartment door.                                             Headlights.
                                                              Dimmer switch.
Step 3: Start Engine and Inspect Inside the Cab               Turn signal.
                                                              Four-way flashers.
Get In and Start Engine                                       Parking, clearance,
                                                              switch(es).
Make sure parking brake is on.
                                                                                         Figure 2.5
Put gearshift in neutral (or "park" if automatic).
                                                              Check Mirrors and Windshield. Inspect mirrors
Start engine; listen for unusual noises.                      and windshield for cracks, dirt, illegal stickers, or
                                                              other obstructions to seeing clearly. Clean and
If equipped, check the Anti-lock Braking System               adjust as necessary.
(ABS) indicator lights. Light on dash should come
on and then turn off. If it stays on the ABS is not           Check Emergency Equipment
working properly. For trailers only, if the yellow
light on the left rear of the trailer stays on, the ABS       Check for safety equipment:
is not working properly.                                      Spare electrical fuses (unless vehicle has circuit
                                                              breakers).
Look at the Gauges                                            Three red reflective triangles, 6 fusees or 3 liquid
                                                              burning flares.
Oil pressure. Should come up to normal within                 Properly charged and rated fire extinguisher.
seconds after engine is started. See Figure 2.5
                                                              Check for optional items such as:
Air pressure. Pressure should build from 50 to 90             Chains (where winter conditions require).
psi within 3 minutes. Build air pressure to governor
cut-out (usually around 120 ­ 140 psi. Know your
vehicle's requirements.

Ammeter and/or voltmeter. Should be in normal
range(s).

Coolant temperature. Should begin gradual rise to
normal operating range.

Engine oil temperature. Should begin gradual rise
to normal operating range.

Warning lights and buzzers. Oil, coolant, charging
circuit warning, and antilock brake system lights
should go out right away.

Check Condition of Controls. Check all of the
following for looseness, sticking, damage, or
improper setting:

Steering wheel.

Clutch.

Accelerator ("gas pedal").

Brake controls.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                                                               Page 2-4
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Tire changing equipment.                                      Front
List of emergency phone numbers
Accident reporting kit (packet).                              Condition of front axle.

Check Safety Belt. Check that the safety belt is              Condition of steering system.
securely mounted, adjusts; latches properly and is
not ripped or frayed.                                         No loose, worn, bent, damaged or missing parts.

Step 4: Turn Off Engine and Check Lights                      Must grab steering mechanism to test for
                                                              looseness.
Make sure the parking brake is set, turn off the
engine, and take the key with you. Turn on                    Condition of windshield.
headlights (low beams) and four-way emergency                 Check for damage and clean if dirty.
flashers, and get out of the vehicle.                         Check windshield wiper arms for proper spring
                                                              tension.
Step 5: Do Walk-around Inspection                             Check wiper blades for damage, "stiff" rubber, and
                                                              securement.
Go to front of vehicle and check that low beams
are on and both of the four-way flashers are                  Lights and reflectors.
working.                                                      Parking, clearance, and identification lights clean,
                                                              operating, and proper color (amber at front).
Push dimmer switch and check that high beams                  Reflectors clean and proper color (amber at front).
work.                                                         Right front turn signal light clean, operating, and
                                                              proper color (amber or white on signals facing
Turn off headlights and four-way emergency                    forward).
flashers.
                                                              Right Side
Turn on parking, clearance, side-marker, and
identification lights.                                        Right front: check all items as done on left front.

Turn on right turn signal, and start walk-around              Primary and secondary safety cab locks engaged
inspection.                                                   (if cab-over-engine design).

General                                                       Right fuel tank(s).
                                                              Securely mounted, not damaged, or leaking.
Walk around and inspect.                                      Fuel crossover line secure.
                                                              Tank(s) contain enough fuel.
Clean all lights, reflectors, and glass as you go             Cap(s) on and secure.
along.                                                        Condition of visible parts.

Left Front Side                                               Rear of engine--not leaking.

Driver's door glass should be clean.                          Transmission--not leaking.

Door latches or locks should work properly.                   Exhaust system--secure, not leaking, not touching
                                                              wires, fuel, or air-lines.
Left front wheel.
Condition of wheel and rim--missing, bent, broken             Frame and cross members--no bends or cracks.
studs, clamps, lugs, or any signs of misalignment.
Condition of tires--properly inflated, valve stem and         Air-lines and electrical wiring--secured against
cap OK, no serious cuts, bulges, or tread wear.               snagging, rubbing, wearing.
Use wrench to test rust-streaked lug nuts,
indicating looseness.                                         Spare tire carrier or rack not damaged (if so
Hub oil level OK, no leaks.                                   equipped).

Left front suspension.                                        Spare tire and/or wheel securely mounted in rack.
Condition of spring, spring hangers, shackles,
u-bolts.                                                      Spare tire and wheel adequate (proper size,
Shock absorber condition.                                     properly inflated).

Left front brake.                                             Cargo securement (trucks).
Condition of brake drum or disc.
Condition of hoses.                                           Cargo properly blocked, braced, tied, chained, etc.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-5
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Header board adequate, secure (if required).                  Rear clearance and identification lights clean,
                                                              operating, and proper color (red at rear).
Side boards, stakes strong enough, free of                    Reflectors clean and proper color (red at rear).
damage, properly set in place (if so equipped).               Taillights clean, operating, and proper color (red at
                                                              rear).
Canvas or tarp (if required) properly secured to              Right rear turn signal operating, and proper color
prevent tearing, billowing, or blocking of mirrors.           (red, yellow, or amber at rear).

If oversize, all required signs (flags, lamps, and            License plate(s) present, clean, and secured.
reflectors) safely and properly mounted and all
required permits in driver's possession.                      Splash guards present, not damaged, properly
                                                              fastened, not dragging on ground, or rubbing tires.
Curbside cargo compartment doors in good
condition, securely closed, latched/locked and                Cargo secure (trucks).
required security seals in place.
                                                              Cargo properly blocked, braced, tied, chained, etc.
Right Rear
                                                              Tailboards up and properly secured.
Condition of wheels and rims--no missing, bent, or
broken spacers, studs, clamps, or lugs.                       End gates free of damage, properly secured in
                                                              stake sockets.
Condition of tires--properly inflated, valve stems
and caps OK, no serious cuts, bulges, tread wear,             Canvas or tarp (if required) properly secured to
tires not rubbing each other, and nothing stuck               prevent tearing, billowing, or blocking of either the
between them.                                                 rearview mirrors or rear lights.

Tires same type, e.g., not mixed radial and bias              If over-length, or over-width, make sure all signs
types.                                                        and/or additional lights/flags are safely and
                                                              properly mounted and all required permits are in
Tires evenly matched (same sizes).                            driver's possession.

Wheel bearing/seals not leaking.                              Rear doors securely closed, latched/locked.

Suspension.                                                   Left Side

Condition of spring(s), spring hangers, shackles,             Check all items as done on right side, plus:
and u-bolts.
                                                              Battery(ies) (if not mounted in engine
Axle secure.                                                  compartment).

Powered axle(s) not leaking lube (gear oil).                  Battery box(es) securely mounted to vehicle.

Condition of torque rod arms, bushings.                       Box has secure cover.

Condition of shock absorber(s).                               Battery(ies) secured against movement.

If retractable axle equipped, check condition of lift         Battery(ies) not broken or leaking.
mechanism. If air powered, check for leaks.
                                                              Fluid in battery(ies) at proper level (except
Condition of air ride components.                             maintenance-free type).

Brakes.                                                       Cell caps present and securely tightened (except
                                                              maintenance-free type).
Brake adjustment.
Condition of brake drum(s) or discs.                          Vents in cell caps free of foreign material (except
Condition of hoses--look for any wear due to                  maintenance-free type).
rubbing.
                                                              Step 6: Check Signal Lights
Lights and reflectors.
Side-marker lights clean, operating, and proper               Get In and Turn Off Lights
color (red at rear, others amber).
Side-marker reflectors clean and proper color (red            Turn off all lights.
at rear, others amber).
                                                              Turn on stop lights (apply trailer hand brake or
Rear                                                          have a helper put on the brake pedal).

Lights and reflectors.                                        Turn on left turn signal lights.

                                                              Get Out and Check Lights

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-6
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Left front turn signal light clean, operating and             Check Vehicle Operation Regularly
proper color (amber or white on signals facing the
front).                                                       You should check:

Left rear turn signal light and both stop lights clean,       Instruments.
operating, and proper color (red, yellow, or amber).
                                                              Air pressure gauge (if you have air brakes).
Get In Vehicle
                                                              Temperature gauges.
Turn off lights not needed for driving.
                                                              Pressure gauges.
Check for all required papers, trip manifests,
permits, etc.                                                 Ammeter/voltmeter.

Secure all loose articles in cab (they might interfere        Mirrors.
with operation of the controls or hit you in a crash).
                                                              Tires.
Start the engine.
                                                              Cargo, cargo covers.
Step 7: Start the Engine and Check
                                                              Lights, etc
Test for Hydraulic Leaks. If the vehicle has
hydraulic brakes, pump the brake pedal three                  If you see, hear, smell, or feel anything that might
times. Then apply firm pressure to the pedal and              mean trouble, check it out.
hold for five seconds. The pedal should not move.
If it does, there may be a leak or other problem.             Safety Inspection. Drivers of trucks and truck
Get it fixed before driving. If the vehicle has air           tractors when transporting cargo must inspect the
brakes, do the checks described in Sections 5 and             securement of the cargo within the first 50 miles of
6 of this manual.                                             a trip and every 150 miles or every three hours
                                                              (whichever comes first) after.
Brake System
                                                              2.1.7 ­ After-trip Inspection and Report
Test Parking Brake(s)
                                                              You may have to make a written report each day
Fasten safety belt                                            on the condition of the vehicle(s) you drove. Report
                                                              anything affecting safety or possibly leading to
Set parking brake (power unit only).                          mechanical breakdown.

Release trailer parking brake (if applicable).                                       Subsection 2.1
                                                                                Test Your Knowledge
Place vehicle into a low gear.
                                                              The vehicle inspection report tells the motor carrier
Gently pull forward against parking brake to make             about problems that may need fixing. Keep a copy
sure the parking brake holds.                                 of your report in the vehicle for one day. That way,
                                                              the next driver can learn about any problems you
Repeat the same steps for the trailer with trailer            have found.
parking brake set and power unit parking brakes               1. What is the most important reason for doing a
released (if applicable).
                                                                   vehicle inspection?
If it doesn't hold vehicle, it is faulty; get it fixed.       2. What things should you check during a trip?
                                                              3. Name some key steering system parts.
Test Service Brake Stopping Action                            4. Name some suspension system defects.
                                                              5. What three kinds of emergency equipment
Go about five miles per hour.
                                                                   must you have?
Push brake pedal firmly                                       6. What is the minimum tread depth for front

"Pulling" to one side or the other can mean brake                  tires? For other tires?
trouble.                                                      7. Name some things you should check on the

Any unusual brake pedal "feel" or delayed stopping                 front of your vehicle during the walk around
action can mean trouble.                                           inspection.
                                                              8. What should wheel bearing seals be checked
If you find anything unsafe during the Vehicle                     for?
inspection, get it fixed. Federal and state laws
forbid operating an unsafe vehicle.

2.1.6 ­ Inspection during a Trip

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-7
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

9. How many red reflective triangles should you               Push the brake pedal down gradually. The amount
     carry?                                                   of brake pressure you need to stop the vehicle will
                                                              depend on the speed of the vehicle and how
10. How do you test hydraulic brakes for leaks?               quickly you need to stop. Control the pressure so
11. Why put the starter switch key in your pocket             the vehicle comes to a smooth, safe stop. If you
                                                              have a manual transmission, push the clutch in
     during the Vehicle inspection?                           when the engine is close to idle.

These questions may be on your test. If you can't             2.2.4 ­ Backing Safely
answer them all, re-read subsection 2.1.
                                                              Because you cannot see everything behind your
2.2 ­ Basic Control of Your Vehicle                           vehicle, backing is always dangerous. Avoid
                                                              backing whenever you can. When you park, try to
To drive a vehicle safely, you must be able to                park so you will be able to pull forward when you
control its speed and direction. Safe operation of a          leave. When you have to back, here are a few
commercial vehicle requires skill in:                         simple safety rules:

Accelerating.                                                 Start in the proper position.

Steering.                                                     Look at your path.

Stopping.                                                     Use mirrors on both sides.

Backing safely.                                               Back slowly.

Fasten your seatbelt when on the road. Apply the              Back and turn toward the driver's side whenever
parking brake when you leave your vehicle.                    possible.

2.2.1 ­ Accelerating                                          Use a helper whenever possible.

Don't roll back when you start. You may hit                   These rules are discussed in turn below.
someone behind you. If you have a manual
transmission vehicle, partly engage the clutch                Start in the Proper Position. Put the vehicle in
before you take your right foot off the brake. Put on         the best position to allow you to back safely. This
the parking brake whenever necessary to keep                  position will depend on the type of backing to be
from rolling back. Release the parking brake only             done.
when you have applied enough engine power to
keep from rolling back. On a tractor-trailer                  Look at Your Path. Look at your line of travel
equipped with a trailer brake hand valve, the hand            before you begin. Get out and walk around the
valve can be applied to keep from rolling back.               vehicle. Check your clearance to the sides and
                                                              overhead, in and near the path your vehicle will
Speed up smoothly and gradually so the vehicle                take.
does not jerk. Rough acceleration can cause
mechanical damage. When pulling a trailer, rough              Use Mirrors on Both Sides. Check the outside
acceleration can damage the coupling.                         mirrors on both sides frequently. Get out of the
                                                              vehicle and check your path if you are unsure.
Speed up very gradually when traction is poor, as
in rain or snow. If you use too much power, the               Back Slowly. Always back as slowly as possible.
drive wheels may spin. You could lose control. If             Use the lowest reverse gear. That way you can
the drive wheels begin to spin, take your foot off            more easily correct any steering errors. You also
the accelerator.                                              can stop quickly if necessary.

2.2.2 ­ Steering                                              Back and Turn Toward the Driver's Side. Back
                                                              to the driver's side so that you can see better.
Hold the steering wheel firmly with both hands.               Backing toward the right side is very dangerous
Your hands should be on opposite sides of the                 because you can't see as well. If you back and turn
wheel. If you hit a curb or a pothole (chuckhole),            toward the driver's side, you can watch the rear of
the wheel could pull away from your hands unless              your vehicle by looking out the side window. Use
you have a firm hold.                                         driver-side backing--even if it means going around
                                                              the block to put your vehicle in this position. The
2.2.3 ­ Stopping                                              added safety is worth it.

                                                              Use a Helper. Use a helper when you can. There
                                                              are blind spots you can't see. That's why a helper

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-8
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

is important. The helper should stand near the                Release accelerator, push in clutch, and shift to
back of your vehicle where you can see the helper.            neutral at the same time.
Before you begin backing, work out a set of hand
signals that you both understand. Agree on a                  Release clutch.
signal for "stop."
                                                              Press accelerator, increase engine and gear speed
2.3 ­ Shifting Gears                                          to the rpm required in the lower gear.

Correct shifting of gears is important. If you can't          Push in clutch and shift to lower gear at the same
get your vehicle into the right gear while driving,           time.
you will have less control.
                                                              Release clutch and press accelerator at the same
2.3.1 ­ Manual Transmissions                                  time.

Basic Method for Shifting Up. Most heavy                      Downshifting, like upshifting, requires knowing
vehicles with unsynchronized manual                           when to shift. Use either the tachometer or the
transmissions require double clutching to change              speedometer and downshift at the right rpm or
gears. If equipped with a synchronized manual                 road speed.
transmission, double clutching is NOT required.
This is the basic method:                                     Special conditions where you should downshift
                                                              are:
Release accelerator, push in clutch and shift to
neutral at the same time.                                     Before Starting Down a Hill. Slow down and shift
                                                              down to a speed that you can control without using
Release clutch.                                               the brakes hard. Otherwise the brakes can
                                                              overheat and lose their braking power.
Let engine and gears slow down to the rpm
required for the next gear (this takes practice).             Downshift before starting down the hill. Make sure
                                                              you are in a low enough gear, usually lower than
Push in clutch and shift to the higher gear at the            the gear required to climb the same hill.
same time.
                                                              Before Entering a Curve. Slow down to a safe
Release clutch and press accelerator at the same              speed, and downshift to the right gear before
time.                                                         entering the curve. This lets you use some power
                                                              through the curve to help the vehicle be more
Shifting gears using double clutching requires                stable while turning. It also allows you to speed up
practice. If you remain too long in neutral, you may          as soon as you are out of the curve.
have difficulty putting the vehicle into the next
gear. If so, don't try to force it. Return to neutral,        2.3.2 ­ Multi-speed Rear Axles and Auxiliary
release clutch, increase engine speed to match                Transmissions
road speed, and try again.
                                                              Multi-speed rear axles and auxiliary transmissions
Knowing When to Shift Up. There are two ways                  are used on many vehicles to provide extra gears.
of knowing when to shift:                                     You usually control them by a selector knob or
                                                              switch on the gearshift lever of the main
Use Engine Speed (rpm). Study the driver's                    transmission. There are many different shift
manual for your vehicle and learn the operating               patterns. Learn the right way to shift gears in the
rpm range. Watch your tachometer, and shift up                vehicle you will drive.
when your engine reaches the top of the range.
(Some newer vehicles use "progressive" shifting:              2.3.3 ­ Automatic Transmissions
the rpm at which you shift becomes higher as you
move up in the gears. Find out what's right for the           Some vehicles have automatic transmissions. You
vehicle you will operate.)                                    can select a low range to get greater engine
                                                              braking when going down grades. The lower
Use Road Speed (mph). Learn what speeds each                  ranges prevent the transmission from shifting up
gear is good for. Then, by using the speedometer,             beyond the selected gear (unless the governor rpm
you'll know when to shift up.                                 is exceeded). It is very important to use this
                                                              braking effect when going down grades.
With either method, you may learn to use engine
sounds to know when to shift.                                 2.3.4 ­ Retarders

Basic Procedures for Shifting Down                            Some vehicles have "retarders." Retarders help
                                                              slow a vehicle, reducing the need for using your
                                                              brakes. They reduce brake wear and give you

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-9
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

another way to slow down. There are four basic                How Far Ahead to Look. Most good drivers look
types of retarders (exhaust, engine, hydraulic, and           at least 12 to 15 seconds ahead. That means
electric). All retarders can be turned on or off by           looking ahead the distance you will travel in 12 to
the driver. On some vehicles the retarding power              15 seconds. At lower speeds, that's about one
can be adjusted. When turned "on," retarders apply            block. At highway speeds it's about a quarter of a
their braking power (to the drive wheels only)                mile. If you're not looking that far ahead, you may
whenever you let up on the accelerator pedal all              have to stop too quickly or make quick lane
the way.                                                      changes. Looking 12 to 15 seconds ahead doesn't
                                                              mean not paying attention to things that are closer.
Because these devices can be noisy, be sure you               Good drivers shift their attention back and forth,
know where their use is permitted.                            near and far. Figure 2.6 illustrates how far to look
                                                              ahead.
Caution. When your drive wheels have poor
traction, the retarder may cause them to skid.
Therefore, you should turn the retarder off
whenever the road is wet, icy, or snow covered.

Subsections 2.2 and 2.3
Test Your Knowledge

1.  Why should you back toward the driver's

    side?

2.  If stopped on a hill, how can you start

    moving without rolling back?

3.  When backing, why is it important to use a

    helper?

4.  What's the most important hand signal that                                            Figure 2.6

    you and the helper should agree on?                       Look for Traffic. Look for vehicles coming onto
                                                              the highway, into your lane, or turning. Watch for
5.  What are the two special conditions where                 brake lights from slowing vehicles. By seeing these
                                                              things far enough ahead, you can change your
    you should downshift?                                     speed, or change lanes if necessary to avoid a
                                                              problem. If a traffic light has been green for a long
6.  When should you downshift automatic                       time it will probably change before you get there.
                                                              Start slowing down and be ready to stop.
    transmissions?
                                                              2.4.2 ­ Seeing to the Sides and Rear
7.  Retarders keep you from skidding when
                                                              It's important to know what's going on behind and
    the road is slippery. True or False?                      to the sides. Check your mirrors regularly. Check
                                                              more often in special situations.
8.  What are the two ways to know when to
                                                              Mirror Adjustment. Mirror adjustment should be
    shift?                                                    checked prior to the start of any trip and can only
                                                              be checked accurately when the trailer(s) are
These questions may be on the test. If you can't              straight. You should check and adjust each mirror
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.2 and 2.3.             to show some part of the vehicle. This will give you
                                                              a reference point for judging the position of the
2.4 ­ Seeing                                                  other images.

To be a safe driver you need to know what's going             Regular Checks. You need to make regular
on all around your vehicle. Not looking properly is a         checks of your mirrors to be aware of traffic and to
major cause of accidents.                                     check your vehicle.

2.4.1 ­ Seeing Ahead                                          Traffic. Check your mirrors for vehicles on either
                                                              side and in back of you. In an emergency, you may
All drivers look ahead; but many don't look far               need to know whether you can make a quick lane
enough ahead.

Importance of Looking Far Enough Ahead.
Because stopping or changing lanes can take a lot
of distance, knowing what the traffic is doing on all
sides of you is very important. You need to look
well ahead to make sure you have room to make
these moves safely.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-10
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

change. Use your mirrors to spot overtaking                                              Figure 2.7
vehicles. There are "blind spots" that your mirrors
cannot show you. Check your mirrors regularly to              2.5 ­ Communicating
know where other vehicles are around you, and to
see if they move into your blind spots.                       2.5.1 ­ Signal Your Intentions

Check Your Vehicle. Use the mirrors to keep an                Other drivers can't know what you are going to do
eye on your tires. It's one way to spot a tire fire. If       until you tell them.
you're carrying open cargo, you can use the
mirrors to check it. Look for loose straps, ropes, or         Signaling what you intend to do is important for
chains. Watch for a flapping or ballooning tarp.              safety. Here are some general rules for signaling.

Special Situations. Special situations require                Turns. There are three good rules for using turn
more than regular mirror checks. These are lane               signals:
changes, turns, merges, and tight maneuvers.                  Signal early. Signal well before you turn. It is the
                                                              best way to keep others from trying to pass you.
Lane Changes. You need to check your mirrors to               Signal continuously. You need both hands on the
make sure no one is alongside you or about to                 wheel to turn safely. Don't cancel the signal until
pass you. Check your mirrors:                                 you have completed the turn.
                                                              Cancel your signal. Don't forget to turn off your turn
Before you change lanes to make sure there is                 signal after you've turned (if you don't have self-
enough room.                                                  canceling signals).

After you have signaled, to check that no one has             Lane Changes. Put your turn signal on before
moved into your blind spot.                                   changing lanes. Change lanes slowly and
                                                              smoothly. That way a driver you didn't see may
Right after you start the lane change, to double-
check that your path is clear.

After you complete the lane change.

Turns. In turns, check your mirrors to make sure
the rear of your vehicle will not hit anything.

Merges. When merging, use your mirrors to make
sure the gap in traffic is large enough for you to
enter safely.

Tight Maneuvers. Any time you are driving in
close quarters, check your mirrors often. Make
sure you have enough clearance.

How to Use Mirrors. Use mirrors correctly by
checking them quickly and understanding what you
see.

When you use your mirrors while driving on the
road, check quickly. Look back and forth between
the mirrors and the road ahead. Don't focus on the
mirrors for too long. Otherwise, you will travel quite
a distance without knowing what's happening
ahead.

Many large vehicles have curved (convex,
"fisheye," "spot," "bug-eye") mirrors that show a
wider area than flat mirrors. This is often helpful.
But everything appears smaller in a convex mirror
than it would if you were looking at it directly.
Things also seem farther away than they really are.
It's important to realize this and to allow for it.
Figure 2.7 shows the field of vision using a convex
mirror.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-11
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

have a chance to honk his/her horn, or avoid your             beams can bother people in the daytime as well as
vehicle.                                                      at night.
                                                              When Parked at the Side of the Road. When you
Slowing Down. Warn drivers behind you when                    pull off the road and stop, be sure to turn on the
you see you'll need to slow down. A few light taps            four-way emergency flashers. This is important at
on the brake pedal -- enough to flash the brake               night. Don't trust taillights to give warning. Drivers
lights -- should warn following drivers. Use the              have crashed into the rear of a parked vehicle
four-way emergency flashers for times when you                because they thought it was moving normally.
are driving very slowly or are stopped. Warn other            If you must stop on a road or the shoulder of any
drivers in any of the following situations:                   road, you must put out your emergency warning
                                                              devices within ten minutes. Place your warning
Trouble Ahead. The size of your vehicle may make              devices at the following locations:
it hard for drivers behind you to see hazards                 If you stop on or by a one-way or divided highway,
ahead. If you see a hazard that will require slowing          place warning devices 10 feet, 100 feet, and 200
down, warn the drivers behind by flashing your                feet toward the approaching traffic. See Figure 2.8
brake lights.
                                                                                         Figure 2.8
Tight Turns. Most car drivers don't know how                  If you stop on a two-lane road carrying traffic in
slowly you have to go to make a tight turn in a               both directions or on an undivided highway, place
large vehicle. Give drivers behind you warning by             warning devices within 10 feet of the front or rear
braking early and slowing gradually.                          corners to mark the location of the vehicle and 100
                                                              feet behind and ahead of the vehicle, on the
Stopping on the Road. Truck and bus drivers                   shoulder or in the lane you stopped in. See Figure
sometimes stop in the roadway to unload cargo or              2.9.
passengers, or to stop at a railroad crossing. Warn
following drivers by flashing your brake lights.
Don't stop suddenly.

Driving Slowly. Drivers often do not realize how
fast they are catching up to a slow vehicle until
they are very close. If you must drive slowly, alert
following drivers by turning on your emergency
flashers if it is legal. (Laws regarding the use of
flashers differ from one state to another. Check the
laws of the states where you will drive.)

Don't Direct Traffic. Some drivers try to help out
others by signaling when it is safe to pass. You
should not do this. You could cause an accident.
You could be blamed and it could cost you many
thousands of dollars.

2.5.2 ­ Communicating Your Presence

Other drivers may not notice your vehicle even
when it's in plain sight. To help prevent accidents,
let them know you're there.

When Passing. Whenever you are about to pass a
vehicle, pedestrian, or bicyclist, assume they don't
see you. They could suddenly move in front of you.
When it is legal, tap the horn lightly or, at night,
flash your lights from low to high beam and back.
And, drive carefully enough to avoid a crash even
if they don't see or hear you.

When It's Hard to See. At dawn, dusk, in rain, or
snow, you need to make yourself easier to see. If
you are having trouble seeing other vehicles, other
drivers will have trouble seeing you. Turn on your
lights. Use the headlights, not just the identification
or clearance lights. Use the low beams; high

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-12
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                           Figure 2.9                                                   Figure 2.10
Back beyond any hill, curve, or other obstruction
that prevents other drivers from seeing the vehicle           When putting out the triangles, hold them between
within 500 feet. If line of sight view is obstructed          yourself and the oncoming traffic for your own
due to hill or curve, move the rear-most triangle to          safety. (So other drivers can see you.)
a point back down the road so warning is provided.
See Figure 2.10.                                              Use Your Horn When Needed. Your horn can let
                                                              others know you're there. It can help to avoid a
Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    crash. Use your horn when needed. However, it
Version: July 2017                                            can startle others and could be dangerous when
                                                              used unnecessarily.

                                                              2.6 ­ Controlling Speed

                                                              Driving too fast is a major cause of fatal crashes.
                                                              You must adjust your speed depending on driving
                                                              conditions. These include traction, curves, visibility,
                                                              traffic and hills.

                                                              2.6.1 ­ Stopping Distance

                                                              Perception Distance + Reaction Distance +
                                                              Braking Distance = Total Stopping Distance

                                                              Perception distance. The distance your vehicle
                                                              travels, in ideal conditions; from the time your eyes
                                                              see a hazard until your brain recognizes it. Keep
                                                              in mind certain mental and physical conditions can
                                                              affect your perception distance. It can be affected
                                                              greatly depending on visibility and the hazard itself.
                                                              The average perception time for an alert driver is
                                                              1¾ seconds. At 55 mph this accounts for 142 feet
                                                              traveled.

                                                                                                                                    Page 2-13
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Reaction distance. The distance you will                      they absorb. But the brakes, tires, springs, and
continue to travel, in ideal conditions; before you           shock absorbers on heavy vehicles are designed
physically hit the brakes, in response to a hazard            to work best when the vehicle is fully loaded.
seen ahead. The average driver has a reaction                 Empty trucks require greater stopping distances
time of ¾ second to 1 second. At 55 mph this                  because an empty vehicle has less traction.
accounts for 61 feet traveled.
                                                              2.6.2 ­ Matching Speed to the Road Surface
Braking distance. The distance your vehicle will
travel, in ideal conditions; while you are braking.           You can't steer or brake a vehicle unless you have
At 55 mph on dry pavement with good brakes, it                traction. Traction is friction between the tires and
can take about 216 feet.                                      the road. There are some road conditions that
                                                              reduce traction and call for lower speeds.
Total stopping distance. The total minimum
distance your vehicle has traveled, in ideal                  Slippery Surfaces. It will take longer to stop, and
conditions; with everything considered, including             it will be harder to turn without skidding, when the
perception distance, reaction distance and braking            road is slippery. Wet roads can double stopping
distance, until you can bring your vehicle to a               distance. You must drive slower to be able to stop
complete stop. At 55 mph, your vehicle will travel            in the same distance as on a dry road. Reduce
a minimum of 419 feet. See Figure 2.11.                       speed by about one-third (e.g., slow from 55 to
                                                              about 35 mph) on a wet road. On packed snow,
                          Figure 2.11                         reduce speed by a half, or more. If the surface is
                                                              icy, reduce speed to a crawl and stop driving as
The Effect of Speed on Stopping Distance.                     soon as you can safely do so.
The faster you drive, the greater the impact or
striking power of your vehicle. When you double               Identifying Slippery Surfaces. Sometimes it's
your speed from 20 to 40 mph the impact is 4                  hard to know if the road is slippery. Here are some
times greater. The braking distance is also 4 times           signs of slippery roads:
longer. Triple the speed from 20 to 60 mph and
the impact and braking distance is 9 times greater.           Shaded Areas. Shady parts of the road will remain
At 60 mph, your stopping distance is greater than             icy and slippery long after open areas have melted.
the length of a football field. Increase the speed to
80 mph and the impact and braking distance are                Bridges. When the temperature drops, bridges will
16 times greater than at 20 mph. High speeds                  freeze before the road will. Be especially careful
greatly increase the severity of crashes and                  when the temperature is close to 32 degrees
stopping distances. By slowing down, you can                  Fahrenheit.
reduce braking distance.
                                                              Melting Ice. Slight melting will make ice wet. Wet
The Effect of Vehicle Weight on Stopping                      ice is much more slippery than ice that is not wet.
Distance. The heavier the vehicle, the more work
the brakes must do to stop it, and the more heat              Black Ice. Black ice is a thin layer that is clear
                                                              enough that you can see the road underneath it. It
                                                              makes the road look wet. Any time the temperature
                                                              is below freezing and the road looks wet, watch out
                                                              for black ice.

                                                              Vehicle Icing. An easy way to check for ice is to
                                                              open the window and feel the front of the mirror,
                                                              mirror support, or antenna. If there's ice on these,
                                                              the road surface is probably starting to ice up.

                                                              Just After Rain Begins. Right after it starts to rain,
                                                              the water mixes with oil left on the road by
                                                              vehicles. This makes the road very slippery. If the
                                                              rain continues, it will wash the oil away.

                                                              Hydroplaning. In some weather, water or slush
                                                              collects on the road. When this happens, your
                                                              vehicle can hydroplane. It's like water skiing--the
                                                              tires lose their contact with the road and have little
                                                              or no traction. You may not be able to steer or
                                                              brake. You can regain control by releasing the
                                                              accelerator and pushing in the clutch. This will slow
                                                              your vehicle and let the wheels turn freely. If the
                                                              vehicle is hydroplaning, do not use the brakes to

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-14
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

slow down. If the drive wheels start to skid, push in         the speed of traffic will not be able to save much
the clutch to let them turn freely.                           time. The risks involved are not worth it. If you go
                                                              faster than the speed of other traffic, you'll have to
It does not take a lot of water to cause                      keep passing other vehicles. This increases the
hydroplaning. Hydroplaning can occur at speeds                chance of a crash, and it is more tiring. Fatigue
as low as 30 mph if there is a lot of water.                  increases the chance of a crash. Going with the
Hydroplaning is more likely if tire pressure is low,          flow of traffic is safer and easier.
or the tread is worn. (The grooves in a tire carry
away the water; if they aren't deep, they don't work          2.6.6 ­ Speed on Downgrades
well.)
                                                              Your vehicle's speed will increase on downgrades
Road surfaces where water can collect can create              because of gravity. Your most important objective
conditions that cause a vehicle to hydroplane.                is to select and maintain a speed that is not too
Watch for clear reflections, tire splashes, and               fast for the:
raindrops on the road. These are indications of
standing water.                                               Total weight of the vehicle and cargo.

2.6.3 ­ Speed and Curves                                      Length of the grade.

Drivers must adjust their speed for curves in the             Steepness of the grade.
road. If you take a curve too fast, two things can
happen. The tires can lose their traction and                 Road conditions.
continue straight ahead, so you skid off the road.
Or, the tires may keep their traction and the vehicle         Weather.
rolls over. Tests have shown that trucks with a high
center of gravity can roll over at the posted speed           If a speed limit is posted, or there is a sign
limit for a curve.                                            indicating "Maximum Safe Speed," never exceed
                                                              the speed shown. Also, look for and heed warning
Slow to a safe speed before you enter a curve.                signs indicating the length and steepness of the
Braking in a curve is dangerous because it is                 grade. You must use the braking effect of the
easier to lock the wheels and cause a skid. Slow              engine as the principal way of controlling your
down as needed. Don't ever exceed the posted                  speed on downgrades. The braking effect of the
speed limit for the curve. Be in a gear that will let         engine is greatest when it is near the governed
you accelerate slightly in the curve. This will help          rpms and the transmission is in the lower gears.
you keep control.                                             Save your brakes so you will be able to slow or
                                                              stop as required by road and traffic conditions.
2.6.4 ­ Speed and Distance Ahead                              Shift your transmission to a low gear before
                                                              starting down the grade and use the proper
You should always be able to stop within the                  braking techniques. Please read carefully the
distance you can see ahead. Fog, rain, or other               section on going down long, steep downgrades
conditions may require that you slowdown to be                safely in "Mountain Driving."
able to stop in the distance you can see. At night,
you can't see as far with low beams as you can                2.6.7 ­ Roadway Work Zones
with high beams. When you must use low beams,
slow down.                                                    Speeding traffic is the number one cause of injury
                                                              and death in roadway work zones. Observe the
2.6.5 ­ Speed and Traffic Flow                                posted speed limits at all times when approaching
                                                              and driving through a work zone. Watch your
When you're driving in heavy traffic, the safest              speedometer, and don't allow your speed to creep
speed is the speed of other vehicles. Vehicles                up as you drive through long sections of road
going the same direction at the same speed are                construction. Decrease your speed for adverse
not likely to run into one another. In many states,           weather or road conditions. Decrease your speed
speed limits are lower for trucks and buses than for          even further when a worker is close to the
cars. It can vary as much as 15 mph. Use extra                roadway.
caution when you change lanes or pass on these
roadways. Drive at the speed of the traffic, if you
can without going at an illegal or unsafe speed.
Keep a safe following distance.

The main reason drivers exceed speed limits is to
save time. But, anyone trying to drive faster than

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-15
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

             Subsections 2.4, 2.5, and 2.6                    How Much Space? How much space should you
                  Test Your Knowledge                         keep in front of you? One good rule says you need
                                                              at least one second for each 10 feet of vehicle
1. How far ahead does the manual say you                      length at speeds below 40 mph. At greater speeds,
        should look?                                          you must add 1 second for safety. For example, if
                                                              you are driving a 40-foot vehicle, you should leave
2. What are two main things to look for ahead?                4 seconds between you and the vehicle ahead. In
                                                              a 60-foot rig, you'll need 6 seconds. Over 40 mph,
3. What's your most important way to see the                  you'd need 5 seconds for a 40-foot vehicle and 7
        sides and rear of your vehicle?                       seconds for a 60-foot vehicle. See Figure 2.12.

4. What does "communicating" mean in safe                     To know how much space you have, wait until the
        driving?                                              vehicle ahead passes a shadow on the road, a
                                                              pavement marking, or some other clear landmark.
5. Where should you place reflectors when                     Then count off the seconds like this: "one
        stopped on a divided highway?                         thousand- and-one, one thousand-and-two" and so
                                                              on, until you reach the same spot. Compare your
6. What three things add up to total stopping                 count with the rule of one second for every ten feet
        distance?                                             of length.

7. If you go twice as fast, will your stopping                If you are driving a 40-foot truck and only counted
        distance increase by two or four times?               up to 2 seconds, you're too close. Drop back a little
                                                              and count again until you have 4 seconds of
8. Empty trucks have the best braking. True or                following distance (or 5 seconds, if you're going
        False?                                                over 40 mph). After a little practice, you will know
                                                              how far back you should be. Remember to add 1
9. What is hydroplaning?                                      second for speeds above 40 mph. Also remember
                                                              that when the road is slippery, you need much
10. What is "black ice"?                                      more space to stop.
These questions may be on the test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.4, 2.5, and
2.6.

2.7 ­ Managing Space                                          Figure 2.12

To be a safe driver, you need space all around                             Page 2-16
your vehicle. When things go wrong, space gives
you time to think and to take action.

To have space available when something goes
wrong, you need to manage space. While this is
true for all drivers, it is very important for large
vehicles. They take up more space and they
require more space for stopping and turning.

2.7.1 ­ Space Ahead

Of all the space around your vehicle, it is the area
ahead of the vehicle--the space you're driving into -
-that is most important.

The Need for Space Ahead. You need space
ahead in case you must suddenly stop. According
to accident reports, the vehicle that trucks and
buses most often run into is the one in front of
them. The most frequent cause is following too
closely. Remember, if the vehicle ahead of you is
smaller than yours, it can probably stop faster than
you can. You may crash if you are following too
closely.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

2.7.2 ­ Space Behind                                          You may be trapped when you need to change
                                                              lanes.
You can't stop others from following you too
closely. But there are things you can do to make it           Find an open spot where you aren't near other
safer.                                                        traffic. When traffic is heavy, it may be hard to find
                                                              an open spot. If you must travel near other
Stay to the Right. Heavy vehicles are often                   vehicles, try to keep as much space as possible
tailgated when they can't keep up with the speed of           between you and them. Also, drop back or pull
traffic. This often happens when you're going                 forward so that you are sure the other driver can
uphill. If a heavy load is slowing you down, stay in          see you.
the right lane if you can. Going uphill, you should
not pass another slow vehicle unless you can get              Strong Winds. Strong winds make it difficult to
around quickly and safely.                                    stay in your lane. The problem is usually worse for
                                                              lighter vehicles. This problem can be especially
Dealing with Tailgaters Safely. In a large vehicle,           bad coming out of tunnels. Don't drive alongside
it's often hard to see whether a vehicle is close             others if you can avoid it.
behind you. You may be tailgated:
                                                              2.7.4 ­ Space Overhead
When you are traveling slowly. Drivers trapped                Hitting overhead objects is a danger. Make sure
behind slow vehicles often follow closely.                    you always have overhead clearance.

In bad weather. Many car drivers follow large                 Don't assume that the heights posted at bridges
vehicles closely during bad weather, especially               and overpasses are correct. Re-paving or packed
when it is hard to see the road ahead.                        snow may have reduced the clearances since the
                                                              heights were posted.
If you find yourself being tailgated, here are some
things you can do to reduce the chances of a                  The weight of a cargo van changes its height. An
crash:                                                        empty van is higher than a loaded one. That you
                                                              got under a bridge when you were loaded does not
Avoid quick changes. If you have to slow down or              mean that you can do it when you are empty.
turn, signal early, and reduce speed very gradually.
                                                              If you doubt you have safe space to pass under an
Increase your following distance. Opening up room             object, go slowly. If you aren't sure you can make
in front of you will help you to avoid having to make         it, take another route. Warnings are often posted
sudden speed or direction changes. It also makes              on low bridges or underpasses, but sometimes
it easier for the tailgater to get around you.                they are not.

Don't speed up. It's safer to be tailgated at a low           Some roads can cause a vehicle to tilt. There can
speed than a high speed.                                      be a problem clearing objects along the edge of
                                                              the road, such as signs, trees, or bridge supports.
Avoid tricks. Don't turn on your taillights or flash          Where this is a problem, drive a little closer to the
your brake lights. Follow the suggestions above.              center of the road.

2.7.3 ­ Space to the Sides                                    Before you back into an area, get out and check
                                                              for overhanging objects such as trees, branches,
Commercial vehicles are often wide and take up                or electric wires. It's easy to miss seeing them
most of a lane. Safe drivers will manage what little          while you are backing. (Also check for other
space they have. You can do this by keeping your              hazards at the same time.)
vehicle centered in your lane, and avoid driving
alongside others.                                             2.7.5 ­ Space Below

Staying Centered in a Lane. You need to keep                  Many drivers forget about the space under their
your vehicle centered in the lane to keep safe                vehicles. That space can be very small when a
clearance on either side. If your vehicle is wide,            vehicle is heavily loaded. This is often a problem
you have little room to spare.                                on dirt roads and in unpaved yards. Don't take a
                                                              chance on getting hung up. Drainage channels
Traveling Next to Others. There are two dangers               across roads can cause the ends of some vehicles
in traveling alongside other vehicles:                        to drag. Cross such depressions carefully.

Another driver may change lanes suddenly and                  Railroad tracks can also cause problems,
turn into you.                                                particularly when pulling trailers with a low

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-17
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

underneath clearance. Don't take a chance on                  Drivers on your left can be more readily seen. See
getting hung up halfway across.                               Figure 2.14.

2.7.6 ­ Space for Turns                                                                 Figure 2.14
                                                              2.7.7 ­ Space Needed to Cross or Enter Traffic
The space around a truck or bus is important in               Be aware of the size and weight of your vehicle
turns. Because of wide turning and off-tracking,              when you cross or enter traffic. Here are some
large vehicles can hit other vehicles or objects              important things to keep in mind.
during turns.                                                 Because of slow acceleration and the space large
                                                              vehicles require, you may need a much larger gap
Right Turns. Here are some rules to help prevent              to enter traffic than you would in a car.
right-turn crashes:                                           Acceleration varies with the load. Allow more room
                                                              if your vehicle is heavily loaded.
Turn slowly to give yourself and others more time             Before you start across a road, make sure you can
to avoid problems.                                            get all the way across before traffic reaches you.

If you are driving a truck or bus that cannot make
the right turn without swinging into another lane,
turn wide as you complete the turn. Keep the rear
of your vehicle close to the curb. This will stop
other drivers from passing you on the right.

Don't turn wide to the left as you start the turn. A
following driver may think you are turning left and
try to pass you on the right. You may crash into the
other vehicle as you complete your turn.

If you must cross into the oncoming lane to make a
turn, watch out for vehicles coming toward you.
Give them room to go by or to stop. However, don't
back up for them, because you might hit someone
behind you. See Figure 2.13.

                          Figure 2.13                         2.8 ­ Seeing Hazards

Left Turns. On a left turn, make sure you have                2.8.1 ­ Importance of Seeing Hazards
reached the center of the intersection before you
start the left turn. If you turn too soon, the left side      What Is a Hazard? A hazard is any road condition
of your vehicle may hit another vehicle because of            or other road user (driver, bicyclist, pedestrian) that
off-tracking.                                                 is a possible danger. For example, a car in front of
                                                              you is headed toward the freeway exit, but his
If there are two turning lanes, always take the right         brake lights come on and he begins braking hard.
turn lane. Don't start in the inside lane because             This could mean that the driver is uncertain about
you may have to swing right to make the turn.                 taking the off ramp. He might suddenly return to
                                                              the highway. This car is a hazard. If the driver of
                                                              the car cuts in front of you, it is no longer just a
                                                              hazard; it is an emergency.

                                                              Seeing Hazards Lets You Be Prepared. You will
                                                              have more time to act if you see hazards before
                                                              they become emergencies. In the example above,
                                                              you might make a lane change or slow down to
                                                              prevent a crash if the car suddenly cuts in front of
                                                              you. Seeing this hazard gives you time to check
                                                              your mirrors and signal a lane change. Being
                                                              prepared reduces the danger. A driver who did not
                                                              see the hazard until the slow car pulled back on
                                                              the highway in front of him would have to do
                                                              something very suddenly. Sudden braking or a

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-18
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

quick lane change is much more likely to lead to a            may be empty, but they may also contain some
crash.                                                        solid or heavy material capable of causing
                                                              damage. The same is true of paper and cloth
Learning to See Hazards. There are often clues                sacks. It is important to remain alert for objects of
that will help you see hazards. The more you drive,           all sorts, so you can see them early enough to
the better you can learn to see hazards. This                 avoid them without making sudden, unsafe moves.
section will talk about hazards that you should be
aware of.                                                     Off Ramps/On Ramps. Freeway and turnpike
                                                              exits can be particularly dangerous for commercial
2.8.2 ­ Hazardous Roads                                       vehicles. Off ramps and on ramps often have
                                                              speed limit signs posted. Remember, these speeds
Move-Over Laws                                                may be safe for automobiles, but may not be safe
                                                              for larger vehicles or heavily loaded vehicles. Exits
The incidents of law enforcement officers,                    that go downhill and turn at the same time can be
emergency medical services, fire department                   especially dangerous. The downgrade makes it
personnel and people working on the road are                  difficult to reduce speed. Braking and turning at the
being struck while performing duties at the                   same time can be a dangerous practice. Make
roadside are increasing at a frightening pace. To             sure you are going slowly enough before you get
lessen the problem, move-over laws have been                  on the curved part of an off ramp or on ramp.
enacted, which require drivers to slow and change
lanes when approaching a roadside incident or                 2.8.3 ­ Drivers Who Are Hazards
emergency vehicle. Signs are posted on roadways
in states that have such laws.                                In order to protect yourself and others, you must
                                                              know when other drivers may do something
When approaching an authorized emergency                      hazardous. Some clues to this type of hazard are
vehicle stopped on the roadside or a work zone,               discussed below.
you should proceed with caution by slowing and
yielding the right-of-way by making a lane change             Blocked Vision. People who can't see others are
into a lane not next to that of the authorized                a very dangerous hazard. Be alert for drivers
emergency vehicle or work zone if safety and                  whose vision is blocked. Vans, loaded station
traffic conditions permit. If a lane change is                wagons, and cars with the rear window blocked are
unsafe, slow down and proceed with caution while              examples. Rental trucks should be watched
maintaining a safe speed for traffic conditions.              carefully. Their drivers are often not used to the
                                                              limited vision they have to the sides and rear of the
Slow down and be very careful if you see any of               truck. In winter, vehicles with frosted, ice-covered,
the following road hazards.                                   or snow-covered windows are hazards.

Work Zones. When people are working on the                    Vehicles may be partly hidden by blind
road, it is a hazard. There may be narrower lanes,            intersections or alleys. If you only can see the rear
sharp turns, or uneven surfaces. Other drivers are            or front end of a vehicle but not the driver, then he
often distracted and drive unsafely. Workers and              or she can't see you. Be alert because he/she may
construction vehicles may get in the way. Drive               back out or enter into your lane. Always be
slowly and carefully near work zones. Use your                prepared to stop.
four-way flashers or brake lights to warn drivers
behind you.                                                   Delivery Trucks Can Present a Hazard.
                                                              Packages or vehicle doors often block the driver's
Drop Off. Sometimes the pavement drops off                    vision. Drivers of step vans, postal vehicles, and
sharply near the edge of the road. Driving too near           local delivery vehicles often are in a hurry and may
the edge can tilt your vehicle toward the side of the         suddenly step out of their vehicle or drive their
road. This can cause the top of your vehicle to hit           vehicle into the traffic lane.
roadside objects (signs, tree limbs). Also, it can be
hard to steer as you cross the drop off, going off            Parked Vehicles Can Be Hazards, especially
the road, or coming back on.                                  when people start to get out of them. Or, they may
                                                              suddenly start up and drive into your way. Watch
Foreign Objects. Things that have fallen on the               for movement inside the vehicle or movement of
road can be hazards. They can be a danger to                  the vehicle itself that shows people are inside.
your tires and wheel rims. They can damage                    Watch for brake lights or backup lights, exhaust,
electrical and brake lines. They can be caught                and other clues that a driver is about to move.
between dual tires and cause severe damage.
Some obstacles that appear to be harmless can be
very dangerous. For example, cardboard boxes

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-19
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Be careful of a stopped bus. Passengers may                   of-state license plates. Unexpected actions
cross in front of or behind the bus, and they often           (stopping in the middle of a block, changing lanes
can't see you.                                                for no apparent reason, backup lights suddenly
                                                              going on) are clues to confusion. Hesitation is
Pedestrians and Bicyclists Can Also Be                        another clue, including driving very slowly, using
Hazards. Walkers, joggers, and bicyclists may be              brakes often, or stopping in the middle of an
on the road with their back to the traffic, so they           intersection. You may also see drivers who are
can't see you. Sometimes they wear portable                   looking at street signs, maps, and house numbers.
stereos with headsets, so they can't hear you                 These drivers may not be paying attention to you.
either. This can be dangerous. On rainy days,
pedestrians may not see you because of hats or                Slow Drivers. Motorists who fail to maintain
umbrellas. They may be hurrying to get out of the             normal speed are hazards. Seeing slow moving
rain and may not pay attention to the traffic.                vehicles early can prevent a crash. Some vehicles,
                                                              by their nature, are slow and seeing them is a
Distractions. People who are distracted are                   hazard clue (mopeds, farm machinery,
hazards. Watch for where they are looking. If they            construction machinery, tractors, etc.). Some of
are looking elsewhere, they can't see you. But be             these will have the "slow moving vehicle" symbol to
alert even when they are looking at you. They may             warn you. This is a red triangle with an orange
believe that they have the right of way.                      center. Watch for it.

Children. Children tend to act quickly without                Drivers Signaling a Turn May Be a Hazard.
checking traffic. Children playing with one another           Drivers signaling a turn may slow more than
may not look for traffic and are a serious hazard.            expected or stop. If they are making a tight turn
                                                              into an alley or driveway, they may go very slowly.
Talkers. Drivers or pedestrians talking to one                If pedestrians or other vehicles block them, they
another may not be paying close attention to the              may have to stop on the roadway. Vehicles turning
traffic.                                                      left may have to stop for oncoming vehicles.

Workers. People working on or near the roadway                Drivers in a Hurry. Drivers may feel your
are a hazard clue. The work creates a distraction             commercial vehicle is preventing them from getting
for other drivers and the workers themselves may              where they want to go on time. Such drivers may
not see you.                                                  pass you without a safe gap in the oncoming
                                                              traffic, cutting too close in front of you. Drivers
Ice Cream Trucks. Someone selling ice cream is                entering the road may pull in front of you in order to
a hazard clue. Children may be nearby and may                 avoid being stuck behind you, causing you to
not see you.                                                  brake. Be aware of this and watch for drivers who
                                                              are in a hurry.
Disabled Vehicles. Drivers changing a tire or
fixing an engine often do not pay attention to the            Impaired Drivers. Drivers who are sleepy, have
danger that roadway traffic is to them. They are              had too much to drink, are on drugs, or who are ill
often careless. Jacked up wheels or raised hoods              are hazards. Some clues to these drivers are:
are hazard clues.
                                                              Weaving across the road or drifting from one side
Accidents. Accidents are particularly hazardous.              to another.
People involved in the accident may not look for
traffic. Passing drivers tend to look at the accident.        Leaving the road (dropping right wheels onto the
People often run across the road without looking.             shoulder, or bumping across a curb in a turn).
Vehicles may slow or stop suddenly.
                                                              Stopping at the wrong time (stopping at a green
Shoppers. People in and around shopping areas                 light, or waiting for too long at a stop).
are often not watching traffic because they are
looking for stores or looking into store windows.             Open window in cold weather.

Confused Drivers. Confused drivers often change               Speeding up or slowing down suddenly, driving too
direction suddenly or stop without warning.                   fast or too slow.
Confusion is common near freeway or turnpike
interchanges and major intersections. Tourists                Be alert for drunk drivers and sleepy drivers late at
unfamiliar with the area can be very hazardous.               night.
Clues to tourists include car-top luggage and out-
                                                              Driver Body Movement as a Clue. Drivers look in
                                                              the direction they are going to turn. You may
                                                              sometimes get a clue from a driver's head and
                                                              body movements that a driver may be going to

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-20
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

make a turn, even though the turn signals aren't              2.9 ­ Distracted Driving
on. Drivers making over-the-shoulder checks may
be going to change lanes. These clues are most                A driver distraction is anything that takes your
easily seen in motorcyclists and bicyclists. Watch            attention away from driving. Whenever you are
other road users and try to tell whether they might           driving a vehicle and your full attention is not on
do something hazardous.                                       the driving task, you are putting yourself, your
                                                              passengers, other vehicles, and pedestrians in
Conflicts. You are in conflict when you have to               danger. Distractive driving can result when you
change speed and/or direction to avoid hitting                perform any activity that may shift your full
someone. Conflicts occur at intersections where               attention from the driving task. Taking your eyes
vehicles meet, at merges (such as turnpike on                 off the road or hands off the steering wheel
ramps) and where there are needed lane changes                presents obvious driving risks. Mental activities
(such as the end of a lane, forcing a move to                 that take your mind away from driving are just as
another lane of traffic). Other situations include            dangerous. Your eyes can gaze at objects in the
slow moving or stalled traffic in a traffic lane, and         driving scene but fail to see them because your
accident scenes. Watch for other drivers who are              attention is distracted elsewhere. Distracted driving
in conflict because they are a hazard to you. When            can cause collisions, resulting in injury, death or
they react to this conflict, they may do something            property damage.
that will put them in conflict with you.
                                                              Activities inside of the vehicle that can distract your
2.8.4 ­ Always Have a Plan                                    attention include: talking to passengers; adjusting
                                                              the radio, CD player or climate controls; eating,
You should always be looking for hazards.                     drinking or smoking; reading maps or other
Continue to learn to see hazards on the road.                 literature; picking up something that fell; reading
However, don't forget why you are looking for the             billboards or other road advertisements: watching
hazards--they may turn into emergencies. You look             other people and vehicles including aggressive
for the hazards in order to have time to plan a way           drivers; talking on a cell phone or CB radio;
out of any emergency. When you see a hazard,                  reading or sending text messages; using any type
think about the emergencies that could develop                of telematic or electronic devices (such as
and figure out what you would do. Always be                   navigation systems, pagers, personal digital
prepared to take action based on your plans. In               assistant, computers, etc.); daydreaming or being
this way, you will be a prepared, defensive driver            occupied with other mental distractions; and many
who will improve your own safety as well as the               others.
safety of all road users.
                                                              Possible distractions that could occur outside a
    Subsections 2.7 and 2.8                                   moving vehicle: outside traffic, vehicles or
     Test Your Knowledge                                      pedestrians; outside events such as police pulling
                                                              someone over or a crash scene; sunlight/sunset;
1.  How do you find out how many seconds of                   objects in roadway; road construction; and many
                                                              others.
    following distance space you have?
                                                              2.9.1 ­ The Distracted Driving Crash Problem
2.  If you are driving a 30-foot vehicle at 55
                                                              The Large Truck Crash Causation Study (LTCCS)
    mph, how many seconds of following                        reported that 8 percent of large-truck crashes
                                                              occurred when Commercial Motor Vehicle (CMV)
    distance should you allow?                                drivers were externally distracted and 2 percent of
                                                              large truck crashes occurred when the driver was
3.  You should decrease your following                        internally distracted.

    distance if somebody is following you too                 Approximately 5,500 people are killed each year
                                                              on U.S. roadways and an estimated 448,000 are
    closely. True or False?                                   injured in motor vehicle crashes involving
                                                              distracted driving (NHTSA Traffic Safety Facts:
4.  If you swing wide to the left before turning              Distracted Driving).

    right, another driver may try to pass you on              Research indicates that the burden of talking on a
                                                              cell phone - even if it's hands-free - saps the brain
    the right. True or False?                                 of 39% of the energy it would ordinarily devote to
                                                              safe driving. Drivers who use a hand-held device
5.  What is a hazard?                                         are more likely to get into a crash serious enough

6.  Why make emergency plans when you see

    a hazard?

These questions may be on the test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.7 and 2.8

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-21
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

to cause injury. (NHTSA distracted driving                    Your CDL will be disqualified after two or more
website, www.distraction.gov).                                convictions of any state law on hand-held mobile
                                                              telephone use while operating a CMV.
2.9.2 ­ Effects of Distracted Driving                         Disqualification is 60 days for the second offense
                                                              within 3 years and 120 days for three or more
Effects of distracted driving include slowed                  offenses within 3 years. In addition, the first and
perception, which may cause you to be delayed in              each subsequent violation of such a prohibition are
perceiving or completely fail to perceive an                  subject to civil penalties imposed on such drivers,
important traffic event; delayed decision making              in an amount up to $2,750. Motor carriers must not
and improper action, which can cause you to be                allow nor require drivers to use a hand-held mobile
delayed in taking the proper action or make                   telephone while driving. Employers may also be
incorrect inputs to the steering, accelerator or              subject to civil penalties in an amount up to
brakes.                                                       $11,000. There is an emergency exception that
                                                              allows you to use your hand-held mobile
2.9.3 ­ Types of Distractions                                 telephones if necessary to communicate with law
                                                              enforcement officials or other emergency services.
There are many causes of distraction, all with the
potential to increase risk.                                   Research shows that the odds of being involved in
                                                              a safety-critical event (e.g., crash, near-crash,
Physical distraction ­ one that causes you to                 unintentional lane deviation) is 6 times greater for
take your hands off the wheel or eyes off the road,           CMV drivers who engage in dialing a mobile
such as reaching for an object.                               telephone while driving than for those who do not.
                                                              Dialing drivers took their eyes off the forward
Mental distraction ­ activities that take your mind           roadway for an average of 3.8 seconds. At 55 mph
away from the road, such as engaging in                       (or 80.7 feet per second), this equates to a driver
conversation with a passenger or thinking about               traveling 306 feet, the approximate length of a
something that happened during the day.                       football field, without looking at the roadway.

Both physical and mental distraction ­ even                   Your primary responsibility is to operate a motor
greater chance a crash could happen, such as                  vehicle safely. To do this, you must focus your full
talking on a cell phone; or sending or reading text           attention on the driving task.
messages.                                                     Note that hands-free devices are no less likely than
                                                              hand-held cell phones to cause you to become
2.9.4 ­ Cell/Mobile Phones                                    distracted. Attention is diverted from the driving
                                                              task while using either device.
49 CFR Part 383, 384, 390, 391 and 392 of the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations                      2.9.5 ­Texting
(FMCSRs) and the Hazardous Materials
Regulations (HMR) restricts the use of hand-held              49 CFR Part 383, 384, 390, 391, 392, the Federal
mobile telephones by drivers of commercial motor              Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR)
vehicles (CMVs); and implements new driver                    prohibits texting by commercial motor vehicle
disqualification sanctions for drivers of CMVs who            (CMV) drivers while operating in interstate
fail to comply with this Federal restriction; or who          commerce; and implements new driver
have multiple convictions for violating a State or            disqualification sanctions for drivers of CMVs who
local law or ordinance on motor vehicle traffic               fail to comply with this Federal prohibition; or who
control that restricts the use of hand-held mobile            have multiple convictions for violating a State or
telephones. Additionally, motor carriers are                  local law or ordinance on motor vehicle traffic
prohibited from requiring or allowing drivers of              control that prohibits texting while driving.
CMVs to use hand-held mobile telephones.                      Additionally, motor carriers are prohibited from
                                                              requiring or allowing their drivers to engage in
The use of hand-held mobile telephones means,                 texting while driving.
``using at least one hand to hold a mobile
telephone to conduct a voice communication;                   Texting means manually entering text into, or
"dialing a mobile telephone by pressing more than             reading text from, an electronic device. This
a single button"; or "moving from a seated driving            includes, but is not limited to, short message
position while restrained by a seat belt to reach for         service, e-mailing, instant messaging, a command
a mobile telephone". If you choose to use a mobile            or request to access a World Wide Web page, or
phone while operating a CMV, you may only use a               engaging in any other form of electronic text
hands free mobile phone that is located close to              retrieval or entry, for present or future
you and that can be operated in compliance with               communication.
the rule to conduct a voice communication.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-22
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Electronic device includes, but is not limited to, a          Turn off all communication devices.
cellular telephone; personal digital assistant;
pager; computer; or any other device used to                  If you must use a mobile phone, make sure it is
enter, write, send, receive, or read text.                    within close proximity, that it is operable while you
                                                              are restrained, use an earpiece or the speaker
Your CDL will be disqualified after two or more               phone function, use voice-activated dialing; or use
convictions of any state law on texting while                 the hands-free feature. Drivers are not in
operating a CMV. Disqualification is 60 days for the          compliance if they unsafely reach for a mobile
second offense within 3 years and 120 days for                phone, even if they intend to use the hands-free
three or more offenses within 3 years. In addition,           function.
the first and each subsequent violation of such a
prohibition are subject to civil penalties imposed on         Do not type or read a text message on a mobile
such drivers, in an amount up to $2,750. No motor             device while driving.
carrier shall allow or require its drivers to engage in
texting while driving. There is an emergency                  Familiarize yourself with your vehicle's features
exception that allows you text if necessary to                and equipment, before you get behind the wheel.
communicate with law enforcement officials or
other emergency services.                                     Adjust all vehicle controls and mirrors to your
                                                              preferences prior to driving.
Evidence suggests that text messaging is even
riskier than talking on a cell phone because it               Pre-program radio stations and pre-load your
requires you to look at a small screen and                    favorite CDs.
manipulate the keypad with one's hands. Texting
is the most alarming distraction because it involves          Clear the vehicle of any unnecessary objects and
both physical and mental distraction                          secure cargo.
simultaneously.
                                                              Review maps, program the GPS and plan your
Research shows that the odds of being involved in             route before you begin driving.
a safety-critical event (e.g., crash, near-crash,
unintentional lane deviation) is 23.2 times greater           Don't attempt to read or write while you drive.
for CMV drivers who engage in texting while
driving than for those who do not. Sending or                 Avoid smoking, eating and drinking while you drive.
receiving text takes your eyes from the road for an           Leave early to allow yourself time to stop to eat.
average of 4.6 seconds. At 55 mph, you would
travel 371 feet, or the length of an entire football          Don't engage in complex or emotionally intense
field ­ without looking at the roadway.                       conversations with other occupants.

2.9.6 ­ Don't Drive Distracted                                Secure commitment from other occupants to
                                                              behave responsibly and to support the driver in
Your goal should be to eliminate all in-vehicle               reducing distractions.
distractions before driving begins. Accomplishing
this goal can be done by:                                     2.9.7 ­ Watch Out for Other Distracted Drivers

Assessing all potential in-vehicle distractions               You need to be able to recognize other drivers who
before driving                                                are engaged in any form of driving distraction. Not
                                                              recognizing other distracted drivers can prevent
Developing a preventative plan to reduce/eliminate            you from perceiving or reacting correctly in time to
possible distractions                                         prevent a crash. Watch for:
                                                              Vehicles that may drift over the lane divider lines or
Expecting distractions to occur                               within their own lane.

Discussing possible scenarios before getting                  Vehicles traveling at inconsistent speeds.
behind the wheel
                                                              Drivers who are preoccupied with maps, food,
Based on the assessment of potential distractions,            cigarettes, cell phones, or other objects.
you can formulate a preventative plan to
reduce/eliminate possible distractions.                       Drivers who appear to be involved in conversations
                                                              with their passengers.
If drivers react a half-second slower because of
distractions, crashes double. Some tips to follow so          Give a distracted driver plenty of room and
you won't become distracted:                                  maintain your safe following distance.

                                                              Be very careful when passing a driver who seems
                                                              to be distracted. The other driver may not be aware
                                                              of your presence, and they may drift in front of you.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-23
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

2.10 ­ Aggressive Drivers/Road Rage                           my guest." This response will soon become a habit
                                                              and you won't be as offended by other drivers'
2.10.1 ­ What Is It?                                          actions.

Aggressive driving and road rage is not a new                 2.10.3 ­ What You Should Do When Confronted
problem. However, in today's world, where heavy               by an Aggressive Driver
and slow-moving traffic and tight schedules are the
norm, more and more drivers are taking out their              First and foremost, make every attempt to get out
anger and frustration in their vehicles.                      of their way.

Crowded roads leave little room for error, leading            Put your pride in the back seat. Do not challenge
to suspicion and hostility among drivers and                  them by speeding up or attempting to hold-your-
encouraging them to take personally the mistakes              own in your travel lane.
of other drivers.
                                                              Avoid eye contact.
Aggressive driving is the act of operating a motor
vehicle in a selfish, bold, or pushy manner, without          Ignore gestures and refuse to react to them.
regard for the rights or safety of others (i.e.
changing lanes frequently and abruptly without                Report aggressive drivers to the appropriate
notice).                                                      authorities by providing a vehicle description,
                                                              license number, location and, if possible, direction
Road rage is operating a motor vehicle with the               of travel.
intent of doing harm to others or physically
assaulting a driver or their vehicle.                         If you have a cell phone, and can do it safely, call
                                                              the police.
2.10.2 ­ Don't Be an Aggressive Driver
                                                              If an aggressive driver is involved in a crash farther
How you feel before you even start your vehicle               down the road, stop a safe distance from the crash
has a lot to do with how stress will affect you while         scene, wait for the police to arrive, and report the
driving.                                                      driving behavior that you witnessed.

Reduce your stress before and while you drive.                                Subsections 2.9 and 2.10
Listen to "easy listening" music.                                               Test Your Knowledge

Give the drive your full attention. Don't allow               1. What are some tips to follow so you won't
yourself to become distracted by talking on your                   become a distracted driver?
cell phone, eating, etc.
                                                              2. How do you use in-vehicle communications
Be realistic about your travel time. Expect delays                 equipment cautiously?
because of traffic, construction, or bad weather
and make allowances.                                          3. How do you recognize a distracted driver?
                                                              4. What is the difference between aggressive
If you're going to be later than you expected ­ deal
with it. Take a deep breath and accept the delay.                  driving and road rage?
                                                              5. What should you do when confronted with an
Give other drivers the benefit of the doubt. Try to
imagine why he or she is driving that way.                         aggressive driver?
Whatever their reason, it has nothing to do with              6. What are some things you can do to reduce
you.
                                                                   your stress before and while you drive?
Slow down and keep your following distance
reasonable.                                                   These questions may be on the test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read subsections 2.9 and 2.10.
Don't drive slowly in the left lane of traffic.
                                                              2.11 ­ Driving at Night
Avoid gestures. Keep your hands on the wheel.
Avoid making any gestures that might anger                    2.11.1 ­ It's More Dangerous
another driver, even seemingly harmless
expressions of irritation like shaking your head.             You are at greater risk when you drive at night.
                                                              Drivers can't see hazards as quickly as in daylight,
Be a cautious and courteous driver. If another                so they have less time to respond. Drivers caught
driver seems eager to get in front of you, say, "Be           by surprise are less able to avoid a crash.
                                                              The problems of night driving involve the driver, the
                                                              roadway, and the vehicle.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-24
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

2.11.2 ­ Driver Factors                                       100,000 police-reported crashes a year are the
                                                              result of drowsy driving. According to the National
Vision. Good vision is critical for safe driving.             Sleep Foundation's Sleep in America poll, 60% of
Your control of the brake, accelerator, and steering          Americans have driven while feeling sleepy and
wheel is based on what you see. If you cannot see             more than one third (36 percent or 103 million
clearly, you will have trouble identifying traffic and        people) admit to having actually fallen asleep at
roadway conditions, spotting potential trouble or             the wheel. Drivers may experience short bursts of
responding to problems in a timely manner.                    sleep lasting only a few seconds or fall asleep for
                                                              longer periods of time. Either way, the chance of a
Because seeing well is so critical to safe driving,           collision increases dramatically.
you should have your eyes checked regularly by
an eye specialist. You may never know you have                At-Risk Groups
poor vision unless your eyes are tested. If you
need to wear glasses or contact lenses for driving,           The risk of having a crash due to drowsy driving is
remember to:                                                  not uniformly distributed across the population.
                                                              Crashes tend to occur at times when sleepiness is
Always wear them when driving, even if driving                most pronounced, for example, during the night
short distances. If your driver license says                  and in the mid-afternoon. Most people are less
corrective lenses are required, it is illegal to move         alert at night, especially after midnight. This is
a vehicle without using corrective lenses.                    particularly true if you have been driving for a long
                                                              time. Thus individuals who drive at night are much
Keep an extra set of corrective lenses in your                more likely to have fall-asleep crashes.
vehicle. If your normal corrective lenses are
broken or lost, you can use the spare lenses to               Research has identified young males, shift
drive safely.                                                 workers, commercial drivers, especially long-haul
                                                              drivers and people with untreated sleep disorders
Avoid using dark or tinted corrective lenses at               or with short-term or chronic sleep deprivation as
night, even if you think they help with glare. Tinted         being at increased risk for having a fall-asleep
lenses cut down the light that you need to see                crash. At least 15% of all heavy truck crashes
clearly under night driving conditions.                       involve fatigue.

People can't see as sharply at night or in dim light.         A congressionally mandated study of 80 long-haul
Also, their eyes need time to adjust to seeing in             truck drivers in the United States and Canada
dim light. Most people have noticed this when                 found that drivers averaged less than 5 hours of
walking into a dark movie theater.                            sleep per day. (Federal Motor Carrier Safety
                                                              Administration, 1996) It is no surprise then that the
Glare. Drivers can be blinded for a short time by             National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)
bright light. It can take several seconds to recover          reported that drowsy driving was probably the
from glare. Even two seconds of glare blindness               cause of more than half of crashes leading to a
can be dangerous. A vehicle going 55 mph will                 truck driver's death. (NTSB, 1990) For each truck
travel more than half the distance of a football field        driver fatality, another three to four people are
during that time.                                             killed. (NHTSA, 1994)

Fatigue and Lack of Alertness. Fatigue is                     Warning Signs of Fatigue
physical or mental tiredness that can be caused by
physical or mental strain, repetitive tasks, illness or       According to the National Sleep Foundation's
lack of sleep. Just like alcohol and drugs, it                Sleep in America poll, 60% of Americans have
impairs your vision and judgment.                             driven while feeling sleepy and 36% admit to
                                                              actually having fallen asleep at the wheel in the
Fatigue causes errors related to speed and                    past year. However, many people cannot tell if or
distance, increases your risk of being in a crash,            when they are about to fall asleep. Here are some
causes you to not see and react to hazards as                 signs that should tell you to stop and rest:
quickly; and affects your ability to make critical
decisions. When you are fatigued, you could fall              Difficulty focusing, frequent blinking or heavy
asleep behind the wheel and crash, injuring or                eyelids
killing yourself or others.
                                                              Yawning repeatedly or rubbing eyes
Fatigued or drowsy driving is one of the leading
causes of traffic collisions. NHTSA estimates that            Day-dreaming; or wandering/disconnected
                                                              thoughts

                                                              Trouble remembering the last few miles driven;
                                                              missing exits or traffic signs

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-25
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Trouble keeping head up                                       Maintaining alertness while driving:
Drifting from your lane, following too closely or             Protect yourself from glare and eyestrain with
hitting a shoulder rumble strip                               sunglasses
Feeling restless and irritable                                Keep cool by opening the window or using the air
                                                              conditioner
When you are tired trying to "push on" is far more            Avoid heavy foods
dangerous than most drivers think. It is a major              Be aware of down time during the day
cause of fatal accidents. If you notice any signs of          Have another person ride with you, and take turns
fatigue, stop driving and go to sleep for the night or        driving
take a 15 ­ 20 minute nap.                                    Take periodic breaks ­ about every 100 miles or 2
                                                              hours during long trips
Are You At Risk?                                              Stop driving and get some rest or take a nap
                                                              Caffeine consumption can increase awareness for
Before you drive, consider whether you are:                   a few hours, but do not drink too much. It will
Sleep-deprived or fatigued (6 hours of sleep or less          eventually wear off. Do not rely on caffeine to
triples your risk)                                            prevent fatigue
Suffering from sleep loss (insomnia), poor quality            Avoid drugs. While they may keep you awake for a
sleep, or a sleep debt                                        while, they won't make you alert.
Driving long distances without proper rest breaks
Driving through the night, mid-afternoon or when              If you are drowsy, the only safe cure is to get off
you would normally be asleep. Many heavy motor                the road and get some sleep. If you don't, you risk
vehicle accidents occur between midnight and 6                your life and the lives of others.
a.m.
Taking sedating medications (antidepressants,                 2.11.3 ­ Roadway Factors
cold tablets, antihistamines)
Working more than 60 hours a week (increases                  Poor Lighting. In the daytime there is usually
your risk by 40%)                                             enough light to see well. This is not true at night.
Working more than one job, and your main job                  Some areas may have bright street lights, but
involves shift work                                           many areas will have poor lighting. On most roads
Driving alone or on a long, rural, dark or boring             you will probably have to depend entirely on your
road                                                          headlights.
Flying, changing time zone
                                                              Less light means you will not be able to see
Preventing drowsiness before a trip:                          hazards as well as in daytime. Road users who do
Get adequate sleep ­ adults need 8 to 9 hours to              not have lights are hard to see. There are many
maintain alertness                                            accidents at night involving pedestrians, joggers,
Prepare route carefully to identify total distance,           bicyclists, and animals.
stopping points and other logistic considerations
Schedule trips for the hours you are normally                 Even when there are lights, the road scene can be
awake, not the middle of the night                            confusing. Traffic signals and hazards can be hard
Drive with a passenger                                        to see against a background of signs, shop
Avoid medications that cause drowsiness                       windows, and other lights.
Consult your physician if you suffer from daytime
sleepiness, have difficulty sleeping at night or take         Drive slower when lighting is poor or confusing.
frequent naps                                                 Drive slowly enough to be sure you can stop in the
Incorporate exercise into your daily life to give you         distance you can see ahead.
more energy
                                                              Drunk Drivers. Drunk drivers and drivers under
                                                              the influence of drugs are a hazard to themselves
                                                              and to you. Be especially alert around the closing
                                                              times for bars and taverns. Watch for drivers who
                                                              have trouble staying in their lane or maintaining
                                                              speed, who stop without reason, or show other
                                                              signs of being under the influence of alcohol or
                                                              drugs.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-26
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

2.11.4 ­ Vehicle Factors                                      clean and unscratched. Don't wear sunglasses at
                                                              night. Do a complete Pre-Trip inspection of your
Headlights. At night your headlights will usually be          vehicle. Pay attention to checking all lights and
the main source of light for you to see by and for            reflectors, and cleaning those you can reach.
others to see you. You can't see nearly as much
with your headlights as you see in the daytime.               Avoid Blinding Others. Glare from your
With low beams you can see ahead about 250 feet               headlights can cause problems for drivers coming
and with high beams about 350-500 feet. You must              toward you. They can also bother drivers going in
adjust your speed to keep your stopping distance              the same direction you are, when your lights shine
within your sight distance. This means going slowly           in their rearview mirrors. Dim your lights before
enough to be able to stop within the range of your            they cause glare for other drivers. Dim your lights
headlights. Otherwise, by the time you see a                  within 500 feet of an oncoming vehicle and when
hazard, you will not have time to stop.                       following another vehicle within 500 feet.

Night driving can be more dangerous if you have               Avoid Glare from Oncoming Vehicles. Do not
problems with your headlights. Dirty headlights               look directly at lights of oncoming vehicles. Look
may give only half the light they should. This cuts           slightly to the right at a right lane or edge marking,
down your ability to see, and makes it harder for             if available. If other drivers don't put their low
others to see you. Make sure your lights are clean            beams on, don't try to "get back at them" by putting
and working. Headlights can be out of adjustment.             your own high beams on. This increases glare for
If they don't point in the right direction, they won't        oncoming drivers and increases the chance of a
give you a good view and they can blind other                 crash.
drivers. Have a qualified person make sure they
are adjusted properly.                                        Use High Beams When You Can. Some drivers
                                                              make the mistake of always using low beams. This
Other Lights. In order for you to be seen easily,             seriously cuts down on their ability to see ahead.
the following must be clean and working properly:             Use high beams when it is safe and legal to do so.
                                                              Use them when you are not within 500 feet of an
Reflectors.                                                   approaching vehicle. Also, don't let the inside of
                                                              your cab get too bright. This makes it harder to see
Marker lights.                                                outside. Keep the interior light off, and adjust your
                                                              instrument lights as low as you can to still be able
Clearance lights.                                             to read the gauges.

Taillights.                                                   If You Get Sleepy, Stop at the Nearest Safe
                                                              Place. People often don't realize how close they
Identification lights.                                        are to falling asleep even when their eyelids are
                                                              falling shut. If you can safely do so, look at yourself
Turn Signals and Brake Lights. At night your turn             in a mirror. If you look sleepy, or you just feel
signals and brake lights are even more important              sleepy, stop driving! You are in a very dangerous
for telling other drivers what you intend to do. Make         condition. The only safe cure is to sleep.
sure you have clean, working turn signals and stop
lights.                                                       2.12 ­ Driving in Fog

Windshield and Mirrors. It is more important at               Fog can occur at any time. Fog on highways can
night than in the daytime to have a clean                     be extremely dangerous. Fog is often unexpected,
windshield and clean mirrors. Bright lights at night          and visibility can deteriorate rapidly. You should
can cause dirt on your windshield or mirrors to               watch for foggy conditions and be ready to reduce
create a glare of its own, blocking your view. Most           your speed. Do not assume that the fog will thin
people have experienced driving toward the sun                out after you enter it.
just as it has risen or is about to set, and found that
they can barely see through a windshield that                 The best advice for driving in fog is don't. It is
seemed to look OK in the middle of the day. Clean             preferable that you pull off the road into a rest area
your windshield on the inside and outside for safe            or truck stop until visibility is better. If you must
driving at night.                                             drive, be sure to consider the following:

2.11.5 ­ Night Driving Procedures                             Obey all fog-related warning signs.

Pre-Trip Procedures. Make sure you are rested                 Slow down before you enter fog.
and alert. If you are drowsy, sleep before you
drive! Even a nap can save your life or the lives of
others. If you wear eyeglasses, make sure they are

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-27
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Use low-beam headlights and fog lights for best               steering tires must have traction to steer the
visibility even in daytime, and be alert for other            vehicle. Enough tread is especially important in
drivers who may have forgotten to turn on their               winter conditions. You must have at least 4/32 inch
lights.                                                       tread depth in every major groove on front tires
                                                              and at least 2/32 inch on other tires. More would
Turn on your 4-way flashers. This will give vehicles          be better. Use a gauge to determine if you have
approaching you from behind a quicker opportunity             enough tread for safe driving.
to notice your vehicle.
                                                              Tire Chains. You may find yourself in conditions
Watch for vehicles on the side of the roadway.                where you can't drive without chains, even to get to
Seeing taillights or headlights in front of you may           a place of safety. Carry the right number of chains
not be a true indication of where the road is ahead           and extra cross-links. Make sure they will fit your
of you. The vehicle may not be on the road at all.            drive tires. Check the chains for broken hooks,
                                                              worn or broken cross-links, and bent or broken
Use roadside highway reflectors as guides to                  side chains. Learn how to put the chains on before
determine how the road may curve ahead of you.                you need to do it in snow and ice.

Listen for traffic you cannot see.                            Lights and Reflectors. Make sure the lights and
                                                              reflectors are clean. Lights and reflectors are
Avoid passing other vehicles.                                 especially important during bad weather. Check
                                                              from time to time during bad weather to make sure
Don't stop along the side of the road, unless                 they are clean and working properly.
absolutely necessary.
                                                              Windows and Mirrors. Remove any ice, snow,
2.13 ­ Driving in Winter                                      etc., from the windshield, windows, and mirrors
                                                              before starting. Use a windshield scraper, snow
2.13.1 ­ Vehicle Checks                                       brush, and windshield defroster as necessary.
Make sure your vehicle is ready before driving in
winter weather. You should make a regular Vehicle             Hand Holds, Steps, and Deck Plates. Remove all
inspection, paying extra attention to the following           ice and snow from hand holds, steps, and deck
items.                                                        plates. This will reduce the danger of slipping.

Coolant Level and Antifreeze Amount. Make                     Radiator Shutters and Winterfront. Remove ice
sure the cooling system is full and there is enough           from the radiator shutters. Make sure the
antifreeze in the system to protect against freezing.         winterfront is not closed too tightly. If the shutters
This can be checked with a special coolant tester.            freeze shut or the winterfront is closed too much,
                                                              the engine may overheat and stop.
Defrosting and Heating Equipment. Make sure
the defrosters work. They are needed for safe                 Exhaust System. Exhaust system leaks are
driving. Make sure the heater is working, and that            especially dangerous when cab ventilation may be
you know how to operate it. If you use other                  poor (windows rolled up, etc.). Loose connections
heaters and expect to need them (e.g., mirror                 could permit poisonous carbon monoxide to leak
heaters, battery box heaters, fuel tank heaters),             into your vehicle. Carbon monoxide gas will cause
check their operation.                                        you to be sleepy. In large enough amounts it can
                                                              kill you. Check the exhaust system for loose parts
Wipers and Washers. Make sure the windshield                  and for sounds and signs of leaks.
wiper blades are in good condition. Make sure the
wiper blades press against the window hard                    2.13.2 ­ Driving
enough to wipe the windshield clean, otherwise
they may not sweep off snow properly. Make sure               Slippery Surfaces. Drive slowly and smoothly on
the windshield washer works and there is washing              slippery roads. If it is very slippery, you shouldn't
fluid in the washer reservoir.                                drive at all. Stop at the first safe place.

Use windshield washer antifreeze to prevent                   Start Gently and Slowly. When first starting, get
freezing of the washer liquid. If you can't see well          the feel of the road. Don't hurry.
enough while driving (for example, if your wipers
fail), stop safely and fix the problem.                       Check for Ice. Check for ice on the road,
                                                              especially bridges and overpasses. A lack of spray
Tires. Make sure you have enough tread on your                from other vehicles indicates ice has formed on the
tires. The drive tires must provide traction to push          road. Also, check your mirrors and wiper blades for
the rig over wet pavement and through snow. The

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-28
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

ice. If they have ice, the road most likely will be icy       Do a normal pre-trip inspection, but pay special
as well.                                                      attention to the following items.

Adjust Turning and Braking to Conditions.                     Tires. Check the tire mounting and air pressure.
Make turns as gently as possible. Don't brake any             Inspect the tires every two hours or every 100
harder than necessary, and don't use the engine               miles when driving in very hot weather. Air
brake or speed retarder. (They can cause the                  pressure increases with temperature. Do not let air
driving wheels to skid on slippery surfaces.)                 out or the pressure will be too low when the tires
                                                              cool off. If a tire is too hot to touch, remain stopped
Adjust Speed to Conditions. Don't pass slower                 until the tire cools off. Otherwise the tire may blow
vehicles unless necessary. Go slowly and watch                out or catch fire.
far enough ahead to keep a steady speed. Avoid
having to slow down and speed up. Take curves at              Engine Oil. The engine oil helps keep the engine
slower speeds and don't brake while in curves. Be             cool, as well as lubricating it. Make sure there is
aware that as the temperature rises to the point              enough engine oil. If you have an oil temperature
where ice begins to melt, the road becomes even               gauge, make sure the temperature is within the
more slippery. Slow down more.                                proper range while you are driving.

Adjust Space to Conditions. Don't drive                       Engine Coolant. Before starting out, make sure
alongside other vehicles. Keep a longer following             the engine cooling system has enough water and
distance. When you see a traffic jam ahead, slow              antifreeze according to the engine manufacturer's
down or stop to wait for it to clear. Try hard to             directions. (Antifreeze helps the engine under hot
anticipate stops early and slow down gradually.               conditions as well as cold conditions.) When
Watch for snowplows, as well as salt and sand                 driving, check the water temperature or coolant
trucks, and give them plenty of room.                         temperature gauge from time to time. Make sure
                                                              that it remains in the normal range. If the gauge
Wet Brakes. When driving in heavy rain or deep                goes above the highest safe temperature, there
standing water, your brakes will get wet. Water in            may be something wrong that could lead to engine
the brakes can cause the brakes to be weak, to                failure and possibly fire. Stop driving as soon as
apply unevenly, or to grab. This can cause lack of            safely possible and try to find out what is wrong.
braking power, wheel lockups, pulling to one side
or the other, and jackknife if you pull a trailer.            Some vehicles have sight glasses, see-through
                                                              coolant overflow containers, or coolant recovery
Avoid driving through deep puddles or flowing                 containers. These permit you to check the coolant
water if possible. If not, you should:                        level while the engine is hot. If the container is not
                                                              part of the pressurized system, the cap can be
Slow down and place transmission in a low gear.               safely removed and coolant added even when the
                                                              engine is at operating temperature.
Gently put on the brakes. This presses linings
against brake drums or discs and keeps mud, silt,             Never remove the radiator cap or any part of the
sand, and water from getting in.                              pressurized system until the system has cooled.
                                                              Steam and boiling water can spray under pressure
Increase engine rpm and cross the water while                 and cause severe burns. If you can touch the
keeping light pressure on the brakes.                         radiator cap with your bare hand, it is probably cool
                                                              enough to open.
When out of the water, maintain light pressure on
the brakes for a short distance to heat them up and           If coolant has to be added to a system without a
dry them out.                                                 recovery tank or overflow tank, follow these steps:

Make a test stop when safe to do so. Check                    Shut engine off.
behind to make sure no one is following, then
apply the brakes to be sure they work well. If not,           Wait until engine has cooled.
dry them out further as described above.
(CAUTION: Do not apply too much brake pressure                Protect hands (use gloves or a thick cloth).
and accelerator at the same time, or you can
overheat brake drums and linings.)                            Turn radiator cap slowly to the first stop, which
                                                              releases the pressure seal.
2.14 ­ Driving in Very Hot Weather
                                                              Step back while pressure is released from cooling
2.14.1 ­ Pre-Trip Checks                                      system.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-29
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

When all pressure has been released, press down               2.15 ­ Railroad-highway Crossings
on the cap and turn it further to remove it.
                                                              Railroad-highway grade crossings are a special
Visually check level of coolant and add more                  kind of intersection where the roadway crosses
coolant if necessary.                                         train tracks. These crossings are always
                                                              dangerous. Every such crossing must be
Replace cap and turn all the way to the closed                approached with the expectation that a train is
position.                                                     coming. It is extremely difficult to judge the
                                                              distance of the train from the crossing as well as
Engine Belts. Learn how to check v-belt tightness             the speed of an approaching train.
on your vehicle by pressing on the belts. Loose
belts will not turn the water pump and/or fan                 2.15.1 ­ Types of Crossings
properly. This will result in overheating. Also, check
belts for cracking or other signs of wear.                    Passive Crossings. This type of crossing does
                                                              not have any type of traffic control device. The
Hoses. Make sure coolant hoses are in good                    decision to stop or proceed rests entirely in your
condition. A broken hose while driving can lead to            hands. Passive crossings require you to recognize
engine failure and even fire.                                 the crossing, search for any train using the tracks
                                                              and decide if there is sufficient clear space to cross
2.14.2 ­ Driving                                              safely. Passive crossings have yellow circular
                                                              advance warning signs, pavement markings and
Watch for Bleeding Tar. Tar in the road pavement              crossbucks to assist you in recognizing a crossing.
frequently rises to the surface in very hot weather.
Spots where tar "bleeds" to the surface are very              Active Crossings. This type of crossing has a
slippery.                                                     traffic control device installed at the crossing to
                                                              regulate traffic at the crossing. These active
Go Slowly Enough to Prevent Overheating.                      devices include flashing red lights, with or without
High speeds create more heat for tires and the                bells and flashing red lights with bells and gates.
engine. In desert conditions the heat may build up
to the point where it is dangerous. The heat will             2.15.2 ­ Warning Signs and Devices
increase chances of tire failure or even fire, and
engine failure.                                               Advance Warning Signs. The round, black-on-
                                                              yellow warning sign is placed ahead of a public
Subsections 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, and 2.14                        railroad-highway crossing. The advance warning
                  Test Your Knowledge                         sign tells you to slow down, look and listen for the
                                                              train, and be prepared to stop at the tracks if a train
1. You should use low beams whenever you                      is coming. All passenger and hazmat carrying
      can. True or False?                                     vehicles are required to stop. See Figure 2.15.

2. What should you do before you drive if you
      are drowsy?

3. What effects can wet brakes cause? How can
      you avoid these problems?

4. You should let air out of hot tires so the
      pressure goes back to normal. True or False?

5. You can safely remove the radiator cap as
      long as the engine isn't overheated. True or
      False?

These questions may be on the test. If you can't
answer all of them, re-read subsections 2.11, 2.12,
2.13, and 2.14.

                                                              Figure 2.15

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                                 Page 2-30
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Pavement Markings. Pavement markings mean                     red lights and bells. When the lights begin to flash,
the same as the advance warning sign. They                    stop! A train is approaching. You are required to
consist of an "X" with the letters ""RR" and a no-            yield the right-of-way to the train. If there is more
passing marking on two-lane roads. See Figure                 than one track, make sure all tracks are clear
2.16.                                                         before crossing. See Figure 2.18.

                                                              Gates. Many railroad-highway crossings have
                                                              gates with flashing red lights and bells. Stop when
                                                              the lights begin to flash and before the gate lowers
                                                              across the road lane. Remain stopped until the
                                                              gates go up and the lights have stopped flashing.
                                                              Proceed when it is safe. See Figure 2.18.

                          Figure 2.16                                                   Figure 2.18
There is also a no passing zone sign on two-lane
roads. There may be a white stop line painted on              2.15.3 ­ Driving Procedures
the pavement before the railroad tracks. The front
of the school bus must remain behind this line                Never Race a Train to a Crossing. Never attempt
while stopped at the crossing.                                to race a train to a crossing. It is extremely difficult
Cross-buck Signs. This sign marks the grade                   to judge the speed of an approaching train.
crossing. It requires you to yield the right-of-way to
the train. If there is no white stop line painted on          Reduce Speed. Speed must be reduced in
the pavement, vehicles that are required to stop              accordance with your ability to see approaching
must stop no closer than 15 feet or more than 50              trains in any direction, and speed must be held to a
feet from the nearest rail of the nearest track.              point which will permit you to stop short of the
When the road crosses over more than one track,               tracks in case a stop is necessary.
a sign below the cross-buck indicates the number
of tracks. See Figure 2.17.                                   Don't Expect to Hear a Train. Trains may not or
                                                              are prohibited from sounding horns when
                          Figure2.17                          approaching some crossings. Public crossings
                                                              where trains do not sound horns should be
Flashing Red Light Signals. At many highway-rail              identified by signs. Noise inside your vehicle may,
grade crossings, the cross-buck sign has flashing             also prevent you from hearing the train horn until
                                                              the train is dangerously close to the crossing.
Section 2 ­ Driving Safely
Version: July 2017                                            Don't Rely on Signals. You should not rely solely
                                                              upon the presence of warning signals, gates, or
                                                              flagmen to warn of the approach of trains. Be
                                                              especially alert at crossings that do not have gates
                                                              or flashing red light signals.

                                                                                                                                    Page 2-31
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Double Tracks Require a Double Check.                         2.16 ­ Mountain Driving
Remember that a train on one track may hide a
train on the other track. Look both ways before               In mountain driving, gravity plays a major role. On
crossing. After one train has cleared a crossing, be          any upgrade, gravity slows you down. The steeper
sure no other trains are near before starting across          the grade, the longer the grade, and/or the heavier
the tracks.                                                   the load--the more you will have to use lower gears
                                                              to climb hills or mountains. In coming down long,
Yard Areas and Grade Crossings in Cities and                  steep downgrades, gravity causes the speed of
Towns. Yard areas and grade crossings in cities               your vehicle to increase. You must select an
and towns are just as dangerous as rural grade                appropriate safe speed, then use a low gear, and
crossings. Approach them with as much caution.                proper braking techniques. You should plan ahead
                                                              and obtain information about any long, steep
2.15.4 ­ Stopping Safely at Railroad- highway                 grades along your planned route of travel. If
Crossings                                                     possible, talk to other drivers who are familiar with
                                                              the grades to find out what speeds are safe.
A full stop is required at grade crossings whenever:
                                                              You must go slowly enough so your brakes can
The nature of the cargo makes a stop mandatory                hold you back without getting too hot. If the brakes
under state or federal regulations.                           become too hot, they may start to "fade." This
                                                              means you have to apply them harder and harder
Such a stop is otherwise required by law.                     to get the same stopping power. If you continue to
                                                              use the brakes hard, they can keep fading until you
When stopping be sure to:                                     cannot slow down or stop at all.

Check for traffic behind you while stopping                   2.16.1 ­ Select a "Safe" Speed
gradually. Use a pullout lane, if available.
                                                              Your most important consideration is to select a
Turn on your four-way emergency flashers.                     speed that is not too fast for the:

2.15.5 ­ Crossing the Tracks                                  Total weight of the vehicle and cargo.

Railroad crossings with steep approaches can                  Length of the grade.
cause your unit to hang up on the tracks.
                                                              Steepness of the grade.
Never permit traffic conditions to trap you in a
position where you have to stop on the tracks. Be             Road conditions.
sure you can get all the way across the tracks
before you start across. It takes a typical tractor-          Weather.
trailer unit at least 14 seconds to clear a single
track and more than 15 seconds to clear a double              If a speed limit is posted, or there is a sign
track.                                                        indicating "Maximum Safe Speed," never exceed
                                                              the speed shown. Also, look for and heed warning
Do not shift gears while crossing railroad tracks.            signs indicating the length and steepness of the
                                                              grade.
2.15.6 ­ Special Situations
                                                              You must use the braking effect of the engine as
Be Aware! These trailers can get stuck on raised              the principal way of controlling your speed. The
crossings:                                                    braking effect of the engine is greatest when it is
                                                              near the governed rpms and the transmission is in
Low slung units (lowboy, car carrier, moving van,             the lower gears. Save your brakes so you will be
possum-belly livestock trailer).                              able to slow or stop as required by road and traffic
                                                              conditions.
Single-axle tractor pulling a long trailer with its
landing gear set to accommodate a tandem-axle                 2.16.2 ­ Select the Right Gear before Starting
tractor.                                                      Down the Grade

If for any reason you get stuck on the tracks, get            Shift the transmission to a low gear before starting
out of the vehicle and away from the tracks. Check            down the grade. Do not try to downshift after your
signposts or signal housing at the crossing for               speed has already built up. You will not be able to
emergency notification information. Call 911 or               shift into a lower gear. You may not even be able
other emergency number. Give the location of the              to get back into any gear and all engine braking
crossing using all identifiable landmarks, especially         effect will be lost. Forcing an automatic
the DOT number, if posted.                                    transmission into a lower gear at high speed could

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-32
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

damage the transmission and also lead to loss of              as necessary until you have reached the end of the
all engine braking effect.                                    downgrade.

With older trucks, a rule for choosing gears is to            Escape ramps have been built on many steep
use the same gear going down a hill that you                  mountain downgrades. Escape ramps are made to
would need to climb the hill. However, new trucks             stop runaway vehicles safely without injuring
have low friction parts and streamlined shapes for            drivers and passengers. Escape ramps use a long
fuel economy. They may also have more powerful                bed of loose, soft material to slow a runaway
engines. This means they can go up hills in higher            vehicle, sometimes in combination with an
gears and have less friction and air drag to hold             upgrade.
them back going down hills. For that reason,
drivers of modern trucks may have to use lower                Know escape ramp locations on your route. Signs
gears going down a hill than would be required to             show drivers where ramp are located. Escape
go up the hill. You should know what is right for             ramps save lives, equipment and cargo.
your vehicle.
                                                                       Subsections 2.15 and 2.16
2.16.3 ­ Brake Fading or Failure                                           Test Your Knowledge

Brakes are designed so brake shoes or pads rub                1. What factors determine your selection of a
against the brake drum or disks to slow the vehicle.               "safe" speed when going down a long, steep
Braking creates heat, but brakes are designed to                   downgrade?
take a lot of heat. However, brakes can fade or fail
from excessive heat caused by using them too                  2. Why should you be in the proper gear before
much and not relying on the engine braking effect.                 starting down a hill?

Brake fade is also affected by adjustment. To                 3. Describe the proper braking technique when
safely control a vehicle, every brake must do its                  going down a long, steep downgrade.
share of the work. Brakes out of adjustment will
stop doing their share before those that are in               4. What type of vehicles can get stuck on a
adjustment. The other brakes can then overheat                     railroad-highway crossing?
and fade, and there will not be enough braking
available to control the vehicle. Brakes can get out          5. How long does it take for a typical tractor-
of adjustment quickly, especially when they are                    trailer unit to clear a double track?
used a lot; also, brake linings wear faster when
they are hot. Therefore, brake adjustment must be             These questions may be on the test. If you can't
checked frequently.                                           answer them all, re-read subsections 2.15 and
                                                              2.16.
2.16.4 ­ Proper Braking Technique
                                                              2.17 ­ Driving Emergencies
Remember. The use of brakes on a long and/or
steep downgrade is only a supplement to the                   Traffic emergencies occur when two vehicles are
braking effect of the engine. Once the vehicle is in          about to collide. Vehicle emergencies occur when
the proper low gear, the following are the proper             tires, brakes, or other critical parts fail. Following
braking techniques:                                           the safety practices in this manual can help
                                                              prevent emergencies. But if an emergency does
Apply the brakes just hard enough to feel a definite          happen, your chances of avoiding a crash depend
slowdown.                                                     upon how well you take action. Actions you can
                                                              take are discussed below.
When your speed has been reduced to
approximately five mph below your "safe" speed,               2.17.1 ­ Steering to Avoid a Crash
release the brakes. (This brake application should
last for about three seconds.)                                Stopping is not always the safest thing to do in an
                                                              emergency. When you don't have enough room to
When your speed has increased to your "safe"                  stop, you may have to steer away from what's
speed, repeat steps 1 and 2.                                  ahead. Remember, you can almost always turn to
                                                              miss an obstacle more quickly than you can stop.
For example, if your "safe" speed is 40 mph, you              (However, top-heavy vehicles and tractors with
would not apply the brakes until your speed                   multiple trailers may flip over.)
reaches 40 mph. You now apply the brakes hard
enough to gradually reduce your speed to 35 mph
and then release the brakes. Repeat this as often

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-33
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Keep Both Hands on the Steering Wheel. In                     Keep One Set of Wheels on the Pavement, if
order to turn quickly, you must have a firm grip on           Possible. This helps to maintain control.
the steering wheel with both hands. The best way
to have both hands on the wheel, if there is an               Stay on the Shoulder. If the shoulder is clear,
emergency, is to keep them there all the time.                stay on it until your vehicle has come to a stop.
                                                              Signal and check your mirrors before pulling back
How to Turn Quickly and Safely. A quick turn                  onto the road.
can be made safely, if it's done the right way. Here
are some points that safe drivers use:                        Returning to the Road. If you are forced to return
                                                              to the road before you can stop, use the following
Do not apply the brake while you are turning. It's            procedure:
very easy to lock your wheels while turning. If that
happens, you may skid out of control.                         Hold the wheel tightly and turn sharply enough to
                                                              get right back on the road safely. Don't try to edge
Do not turn any more than needed to clear                     gradually back on the road. If you do, your tires
whatever is in your way. The more sharply you                 might grab unexpectedly and you could lose
turn, the greater the chances of a skid or rollover.          control.

Be prepared to "counter-steer," that is, to turn the          When both front tires are on the paved surface,
wheel back in the other direction, once you've                counter-steer immediately. The two turns should
passed whatever was in your path. Unless you are              be made as a single "steer-counter-steer" move.
prepared to counter-steer, you won't be able to do
it quickly enough. You should think of emergency              2.17.2 ­ How to Stop Quickly and Safely
steering and counter-steering as two parts of one
driving action.                                               If somebody suddenly pulls out in front of you, your
                                                              natural response is to hit the brakes. This is a good
Where to Steer. If an oncoming driver has drifted             response if there's enough distance to stop, and
into your lane, a move to your right is best. If that         you use the brakes correctly.
driver realizes what has happened, the natural
response will be to return to his or her own lane.            You should brake in a way that will keep your
                                                              vehicle in a straight line and allow you to turn if it
If something is blocking your path, the best                  becomes necessary. You can use the "controlled
direction to steer will depend on the situation.              braking" method or the "stab braking" method.

If you have been using your mirrors, you'll know              Controlled Braking. With this method, you apply
which lane is empty and can be safely used.                   the brakes as hard as you can without locking the
                                                              wheels. Keep steering wheel movements very
If the shoulder is clear, going right may be best. No         small while doing this. If you need to make a larger
one is likely to be driving on the shoulder but               steering adjustment or if the wheels lock, release
someone may be passing you on the left. You will              the brakes. Re-apply the brakes as soon as you
know if you have been using your mirrors.                     can.

If you are blocked on both sides, a move to the               Stab Braking. With this method, you apply your
right may be best. At least you won't force anyone            brakes all the way and release brakes when
into an opposing traffic lane and a possible head-            wheels lock up. As soon as the wheels start
on collision.                                                 rolling, apply the brakes fully again. (It can take up
                                                              to one second for the wheels to start rolling after
Leaving the Road. In some emergencies, you                    you release the brakes. If you re-apply the brakes
may have to drive off the road. It may be less risky          before the wheels start rolling, the vehicle won't
than facing a collision with another vehicle.                 straighten out.)

Most shoulders are strong enough to support the               Don't Jam on the Brakes. Emergency braking
weight of a large vehicle and, therefore, offer an            does not mean pushing down on the brake pedal
available escape route. Here are some guidelines,             as hard as you can. That will only keep the wheels
if you do leave the road.                                     locked up and cause a skid. If the wheels are
                                                              skidding, you cannot control the vehicle.
Avoid Braking. If possible, avoid using the brakes
until your speed has dropped to about 20 mph.
Then brake very gently to avoid skidding on a
loose surface.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-34
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

2.17.3 ­ Brake Failure                                        If no escape ramp is available, take the least
                                                              hazardous escape route you can--such as an open
Brakes kept in good condition rarely fail. Most               field or a side road that flattens out or turns uphill.
hydraulic brake failures occur for one of two                 Make the move as soon as you know your brakes
reasons: (Air brakes are discussed in Section 5.)             don't work. The longer you wait, the faster the
                                                              vehicle will go, and the harder it will be to stop.
Loss of hydraulic pressure.
                                                              2.17.4 ­ Tire Failure
Brake fade on long hills.
                                                              Recognize Tire Failure. Quickly knowing you
Loss of Hydraulic Pressure. When the system                   have a tire failure will let you have more time to
won't build up pressure, the brake pedal will feel            react. Having just a few extra seconds to
spongy or go to the floor. Here are some things               remember what it is you're supposed to do can
you can do.                                                   help you. The major signs of tire failure are:

Downshift. Putting the vehicle into a lower gear              Sound. The loud "bang" of a blowout is an easily
will help to slow the vehicle.                                recognized sign. Because it can take a few
                                                              seconds for your vehicle to react, you might think it
Pump the Brakes. Sometimes pumping the brake                  was some other vehicle. But any time you hear a
pedal will generate enough hydraulic pressure to              tire blow, you'd be safest to assume it is yours.
stop the vehicle.
                                                              Vibration. If the vehicle thumps or vibrates heavily,
Use the Parking Brake. The parking or                         it may be a sign that one of the tires has gone flat.
emergency brake is separate from the hydraulic                With a rear tire, that may be the only sign you get.
brake system. Therefore, it can be used to slow the
vehicle. However, be sure to press the release                Feel. If the steering feels "heavy," it is probably a
button or pull the release lever at the same time             sign that one of the front tires has failed.
you use the emergency brake so you can adjust                 Sometimes, failure of a rear tire will cause the
the brake pressure and keep the wheels from                   vehicle to slide back and forth or "fishtail."
locking up.                                                   However, dual rear tires usually prevent this.

Find an Escape Route. While slowing the vehicle,              Respond to Tire Failure. When a tire fails, your
look for an escape route--an open field, side-street,         vehicle is in danger. You must immediately:
or escape ramp. Turning uphill is a good way to
slow and stop the vehicle. Make sure the vehicle              Hold the Steering Wheel Firmly. If a front tire fails,
does not start rolling backward after you stop. Put           it can twist the steering wheel out of your hand.
it in low gear, apply the parking brake, and, if              The only way to prevent this is to keep a firm grip
necessary, roll back into some obstacle that will             on the steering wheel with both hands at all times.
stop the vehicle.
                                                              Stay off the Brake. It's natural to want to brake in
Brake Failure on Downgrades. Going slow                       an emergency. However, braking when a tire has
enough and braking properly will almost always                failed could cause loss of control. Unless you're
prevent brake failure on long downgrades. Once                about to run into something, stay off the brake until
the brakes have failed, however, you are going to             the vehicle has slowed down. Then brake very
have to look outside your vehicle for something to            gently, pull off the road, and stop.
stop it.
                                                              Check the Tires. After you've come to a stop, get
Your best hope is an escape ramp. If there is one,            out and check all the tires. Do this even if the
there'll be signs telling you about it. Use it. Ramps         vehicle seems to be handling all right. If one of
are usually located a few miles from the top of the           your dual tires goes, the only way you may know it
downgrade. Every year, hundreds of drivers avoid              is by getting out and looking at it.
injury to themselves or damage to their vehicles by
using escape ramps. Some escape ramps use soft                2.18 ­ Antilock Braking Systems (ABS)
gravel that resists the motion of the vehicle and
brings it to a stop. Others turn uphill, using the hill       ABS is a computerized system that keeps your
to stop the vehicle and soft gravel to hold it in             wheels from locking up during hard brake
place.                                                        applications.

Any driver who loses brakes going downhill should             ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does
use an escape ramp if it's available. If you don't            not decrease or increase your normal braking
use it, your chances of having a serious crash may            capability. ABS only activates when wheels are
be much greater.                                              about to lock up.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-35
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping                wheel speed sensor wires coming from the back of
distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle               the brakes.
under control during hard braking.
                                                              2.18.4 ­ How ABS Helps You
2.18.1 ­ How Antilock Braking Systems Work
                                                              When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a
Sensors detect potential wheel lock up. An                    vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up.
electronic control unit (ECU) will then decrease              When your steering wheels lock up, you lose
brake pressure to avoid wheel lockup.                         steering control. When your other wheels lock up,
                                                              you may skid, jackknife, or even spin the vehicle.
Brake pressure is adjusted to provide the
maximum braking without danger of lockup.                     ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up and maintain
                                                              control. You may or may not be able to stop faster
ABS works far faster than the driver can respond to           with ABS, but you should be able to steer around
potential wheel lockup. At all other times the brake          an obstacle while braking, and avoid skids caused
system will operate normally.                                 by over braking.

2.18.2 ­ Vehicles Required to Have Antilock                   2.18.5 ­ ABS on the Tractor Only or Only on the
Braking Systems                                               Trailer
The Department of Transportation requires that
ABS be on:                                                    Having ABS on only the tractor, only the trailer, or
                                                              even on only one axle, still gives you more control
Truck tractors with air brakes built on or after              over the vehicle during braking. Brake normally.
March 1, 1997.
                                                              When only the tractor has ABS, you should be able
Other air brake vehicles, (trucks, buses, trailers,           to maintain steering control, and there is less
and converter dollies) built on or after March 1,             chance of jackknifing. But keep your eye on the
1998.                                                         trailer and let up on the brakes (if you can safely do
                                                              so) if it begins to swing out.
Hydraulically braked trucks and buses with a gross
vehicle weight rating of 10,000 lbs or more built on          When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less
or after March 1, 1999.                                       likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control
                                                              or start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if
Many commercial vehicles built before these dates             you can safely do so) until you regain control.
have been voluntarily equipped with ABS.
                                                              2.18.6 ­ Braking with ABS
2.18.3 ­ How to Know If Your Vehicle Is
Equipped with ABS                                             When you drive a vehicle with ABS, you should
                                                              brake as you always have. In other words:
Tractors, trucks, and buses will have yellow ABS
malfunction lamps on the instrument panel.                    Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely
                                                              and stay in control.
Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on
the left side, either on the front or rear corner.            Brake the same way, regardless of whether you
                                                              have ABS on the bus, tractor, the trailer, or both.
Dollies manufactured on or after March 1, 1998,
are required to have a lamp on the left side.                 As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer
                                                              and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to
As a system check on newer vehicles, the                      stay in control.
malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb
check, and then goes out quickly. On older                    There is only one exception to this procedure. If
systems, the lamp could stay on until you are                 you drive a straight truck or combination with
driving over five mph.                                        working ABS on all axles, in an emergency stop,
                                                              you can fully apply the brakes.
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes
on once you are under way, you may have lost                  2.18.7 ­ Braking If ABS Is Not Working
ABS control.
                                                              Without ABS you still have normal brake functions.
In the case of towed units manufactured before it             Drive and brake as you always have.
was required by the Department of Transportation,
it may be difficult to tell if the unit is equipped with      Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps
ABS. Look under the vehicle for the ECU and                   to tell you if something isn't working.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-36
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

As a system check on newer vehicles, the                      Over-acceleration. Supplying too much power to
malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb              the drive wheels, causing them to spin.
check and then goes out quickly. On older
systems, the lamp could stay on until you are                 Driving Too Fast. Most serious skids result from
driving over five mph.                                        driving too fast for road conditions. Drivers who
                                                              adjust their driving to conditions don't over-
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes            accelerate and don't have to over-brake or over-
on once you are under way, you may have lost                  steer from too much speed.
ABS control on one or more wheels.
                                                              2.19.1 ­ Drive-wheel Skids
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still
have regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the              By far the most common skid is one in which the
system serviced soon.                                         rear wheels lose traction through excessive
                                                              braking or acceleration. Skids caused by
2.18.8 ­ Safety Reminders                                     acceleration usually happen on ice or snow.
                                                              Taking your foot off the accelerator can easily stop
ABS won't allow you to drive faster, follow more              them. (If it is very slippery, push the clutch in.
closely, or drive less carefully.                             Otherwise, the engine can keep the wheels from
                                                              rolling freely and regaining traction.)
ABS won't prevent power or turning skids­ABS
should prevent brake-induced skids or jackknifes,             Rear wheel braking skids occur when the rear
but not those caused by spinning the drive wheels             drive wheels lock. Because locked wheels have
or going too fast in a turn.                                  less traction than rolling wheels, the rear wheels
                                                              usually slide sideways in an attempt to "catch up"
ABS won't necessarily shorten stopping                        with the front wheels. In a bus or straight truck, the
distance. ABS will help maintain vehicle control,             vehicle will slide sideways in a "spin out." With
but not always shorten stopping distance.                     vehicles towing trailers, a drive-wheel skid can let
                                                              the trailer push the towing vehicle sideways,
ABS won't increase or decrease ultimate                       causing a sudden jackknife. See Figure 2.19.
stopping power­ABS is an "add-on" to your
normal brakes, not a replacement for them.

ABS won't change the way you normally brake.
Under normal brake conditions, your vehicle will
stop as it always stopped. ABS only comes into
play when a wheel would normally have locked up
because of over braking.

ABS won't compensate for bad brakes or poor
brake maintenance.

Remember: The best vehicle safety feature is still
a safe driver.

Remember: Drive so you never need to use your
ABS.

Remember: If you need it, ABS could help to
prevent a serious crash.

2.19 ­ Skid Control and Recovery

A skid happens whenever the tires lose their grip
on the road. This is caused in one of four ways:

Over-braking. Braking too hard and locking up the
wheels. Skids also can occur when using the
speed retarder when the road is slippery.

Over-steering. Turning the wheels more sharply
than the vehicle can turn.

                                                              Figure 2.19

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                                 Page 2-37
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

2.19.2 ­ Correcting a Drive-wheel Braking Skid                When you're in an accident and not seriously hurt,
                                                              you need to act to prevent further damage or
Do the following to correct a drive-wheel braking             injury. The basic steps to be taken at any accident
skid.                                                         are to:

Stop Braking. This will let the rear wheels roll              Protect the area.
again, and keep the rear wheels from sliding.
                                                              Notify authorities.
Counter-steer. As a vehicle turns back on course,
it has a tendency to keep on turning. Unless you              Care for the injured.
turn the steering wheel quickly the other way, you
may find yourself skidding in the opposite direction.         2.20.1 ­ Protect the Area

Learning to stay off the brake, turn the steering             The first thing to do at an accident scene is to keep
wheel quickly, push in the clutch, and counter-steer          another accident from happening in the same spot.
in a skid takes a lot of practice. The best place to          To protect the accident area:
get this practice is on a large driving range or "skid
pad."                                                         If your vehicle is involved in the accident, try to get
                                                              it to the side of the road. This will help prevent
2.19.3 ­ Front-wheel Skids                                    another accident and allow traffic to move.
Driving too fast for conditions causes most front-
wheel skids. Other causes include lack of tread on            If you're stopping to help, park away from the
the front tires and cargo loaded so not enough                accident. The area immediately around the
weight is on the front axle. In a front-wheel skid,           accident will be needed for emergency vehicles.
the front end tends to go in a straight line
regardless of how much you turn the steering                  Put on your flashers.
wheel. On a very slippery surface, you may not be
able to steer around a curve or turn.                         Set out reflective triangles to warn other traffic.
                                                              Make sure other drivers can see them in time to
When a front-wheel skid occurs, the only way to               avoid the accident.
stop the skid is to let the vehicle slow down. Stop
turning and/or braking so hard. Slow down as                  2.20.2 ­ Notify Authorities
quickly as possible without skidding.
                                                              If you have a cell phone or CB, call for assistance
     Subsections 2.17, 2.18, and 2.19                         before you get out of your vehicle. If not, wait until
             Test Your Knowledge                              after the accident scene has been properly
                                                              protected, then phone or send someone to phone
1. Stopping is not always the safest thing to do              the police. Try to determine where you are so you
       in an emergency. True or False?                        can give the exact location.

2. What are some advantages of going right                    2.20.3 ­ Care for the Injured
       instead of left around an obstacle?
                                                              If a qualified person is at the accident and helping
3. What is an "escape ramp?"                                  the injured, stay out of the way unless asked to
4. If a tire blows out, you should put the brakes             assist. Otherwise, do the best you can to help any
                                                              injured parties. Here are some simple steps to
       on hard to stop quickly. True or False?                follow in giving assistance:
5. How do you know if your vehicle has antilock
                                                              Don't move a severely injured person unless the
       brakes?                                                danger of fire or passing traffic makes it necessary.
6. What is the proper braking technique when
                                                              Stop heavy bleeding by applying direct pressure to
       driving a vehicle with antilock brakes?                the wound.
7. How do antilock brakes help you?
                                                              Keep the injured person warm.
These questions may be on the test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.17, 2.18,              2.21 ­ Fires
and 2.19.
                                                              Truck fires can cause damage and injury. Learn
2.20 ­ Accident Procedures                                    the causes of fires and how to prevent them. Know
                                                              what to do to extinguish fires.

                                                              2.21.1 ­ Causes of Fire

                                                              The following are some causes of vehicle fires:

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-38
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

After Accidents. Spilled fuel, improper use of flares.        For a cargo fire in a van or box trailer, keep the
                                                              doors shut, especially if your cargo contains
Tires. Under-inflated tires and duals that touch.             hazardous materials. Opening the van doors will
                                                              supply the fire with oxygen and can cause it to
Electrical System. Short circuits due to damaged              burn very fast.
insulation, loose connections.
                                                              Extinguish the Fire. Here are some rules to follow
Fuel. Driver smoking, improper fueling, loose fuel            in putting out a fire:
connections.
                                                              When using the extinguisher, stay as far away from
Cargo. Flammable cargo, improperly sealed or                  the fire as possible.
loaded cargo, poor ventilation.
                                                              Aim at the source or base of the fire, not up in the
2.21.2 ­ Fire Prevention                                      flames.

Pay attention to the following:                               Use the Right Fire Extinguisher

Vehicle Inspection. Make a complete inspection of             Figures 2.20 and 2.21 detail the type of fire
the electrical, fuel, and exhaust systems, tires, and         extinguisher to use by class of fire.
cargo. Be sure to check that the fire extinguisher is
charged.                                                      The B:C type fire extinguisher is designed to work
                                                              on electrical fires and burning liquids.
En Route Inspection. Check the tires, wheels, and
truck body for signs of heat whenever you stop                The A:B:C type is designed to work on burning
during a trip.                                                wood, paper, and cloth as well.

Follow Safe Procedures. Follow correct safety                 Water can be used on wood, paper, or cloth, but
procedures for fueling the vehicle, using brakes,             don't use water on an electrical fire (can cause
handling flares, and other activities that can cause          shock) or a gasoline fire (it will spread the flames).
a fire.
                                                              A burning tire must be cooled. Lots of water may
Monitoring. Check the instruments and gauges                  be required.
often for signs of overheating and use the mirrors
to look for signs of smoke from tires or the vehicle.         If you're not sure what to use, especially on a
                                                              hazardous materials fire, wait for firefighters.
Caution. Use normal caution in handling anything
flammable.                                                    Position yourself upwind. Let the wind carry the
                                                              extinguisher to the fire.
2.21.3 ­ Fire Fighting
                                                              Continue until whatever was burning has been
Knowing how to fight fires is important. Drivers who          cooled. Absence of smoke or flame does not mean
didn't know what to do have made fires worse.                 the fire cannot restart.
Know how the fire extinguisher works. Study the
instructions printed on the extinguisher before you           Class     Class/Type of Fires
need it. Here are some procedures to follow in                   A   Type
case of fire.
                                                                 B   Wood, Paper, Ordinary Combustibles
Pull Off the Road. The first step is to get the
vehicle off the road and stop. In doing so:                          Extinguish by Cooling and
                                                                     Quenching Using Water or Dry
Park in an open area, away from buildings, trees,                    Chemicals
brush, other vehicles, or anything that might catch
fire.                                                                Gasoline, Oil, Grease, Other Greasy
                                                                     Liquids
Don't pull into a service station!
                                                                     Extinguish by Smothering, Cooling
Notify emergency services of your problem and                        or Heat Shielding using carbon
your location.                                                       Dioxide or Dry Chemicals

Keep the Fire from Spreading. Before trying to                C Electrical Equipment Fires
put out the fire, make sure that it doesn't spread
any further.                                                           Extinguish with Non-conducting
                                                                       Agents such as Carbon Dioxide or
With an engine fire, turn off the engine as soon as                    Dry Chemicals. DO NOT USE
you can. Don't open the hood if you can avoid it.                      WATER.
Shoot foam through louvers, radiator, or from the
vehicle's underside.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                           Page 2-39
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

D Fires in Combustible Metals                                 2.22 ­ Alcohol, Other Drugs, and
                                                              Driving
         Extinguish by Using Specialized
         Extinguishing Powders                                2.22.1 ­ Alcohol and Driving

                  Figure 2.20                                 Drinking alcohol and then driving is very dangerous
                                                              and a serious problem. People who drink alcohol
Class of Fire/Type of Extinguisher                            are involved in traffic accidents resulting in over
                                                              20,000 deaths every year. Alcohol impairs muscle
Class of Fire               Fire Extinguisher Type            coordination, reaction time, depth perception, and
                                                              night vision. It also affects the parts of the brain
B or C                      Regular Dry Chemical              that control judgment and inhibition. For some
                                                              people, one drink is all it takes to show signs of
A, B, C, or D Multi-Purpose Dry Chemical                      impairment.

D                           Purple K Dry Chemical             How Alcohol Works. Alcohol goes directly into the
                                                              blood stream and is carried to the brain. After
B or C                       KCL Dry Chemical                 passing through the brain, a small percentage is
   D                                                          removed in urine, perspiration, and by breathing,
                            Dry Powder Special                while the rest is carried to the liver. The liver can
B or C                            Compound                    only process one-third an ounce of alcohol per
                                                              hour, which is considerably less than the alcohol in
                            Carbon Dioxide (Dry)              a standard drink. This is a fixed rate, so only time,
                                                              not black coffee or a cold shower, will sober you
B or C         Halogenated Agent (Gas)                        up. If you have drinks faster than your body can
                                                              get rid of them, you will have more alcohol in your
A                           Water                             body, and your driving will be more affected. The
                                                              Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) commonly
A                           Water With Anti-Freeze            measures the amount of alcohol in your body. See
                                                              Figure 2.22.

A or B         Water, Loaded Steam Style

B, On Some A                Foam

               Figure 2.21

         Subsections 2.20 and 2.21
             Test Your Knowledge

1. What are some things to do at an accident
      scene to prevent another accident?

2. Name two causes of tire fires.
3. What kinds of fires is a B:C extinguisher not

      good for?
4. When using your extinguisher, should you get

      as close as possible to the fire?
5. Name some causes of vehicle fires.

These questions may be on the test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.20 and 2.21.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-40
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                                                                                             What   Determines  Blood  Alcohol

                      What Is a Drink?                                                                       Concentration? BAC is determined by the amount
It is the alcohol in drinks that affects human
performance. It doesn't make any difference                                                                  of alcohol you drink (more alcohol means higher
whether that alcohol comes from "a couple of
beers," or from two glasses of wine, or two shots of                                                         BAC), how fast you drink (faster drinking means
hard liquor. Approximate Blood Alcohol Content
                                                                                                             higher BAC), and your weight (a small person
                 Body Weight in Pounds
                                                                                                             doesn't have to drink as much to reach the same
0 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00
                                                                                                             BAC).
1 .04 .03 .03 .02 .02 .02 .02 .02
                                                                   240  Effects                              Alcohol and the Brain. Alcohol affects more and
2 .08 .06 .05 .05 .04 .04 .03 .03                         220                                                more of the brain as BAC builds up. The first part
3 .11 .09 .08 .07 .06 .06 .05 .05                 200                                                        of the brain affected controls judgment and self-
                                         180                                                                 control. One of the bad things about this is it can
                                 160                                                                         keep drinkers from knowing they are getting drunk.
                        140                                                                                  And, of course, good judgment and self-control are
                120                                                                                          absolutely necessary for safe driving.
       100
Drinks                                                                                                       As BAC continues to build up, muscle control,
                                                                                                             vision, and coordination are affected more and
                                                                           Only Safe Impairment              more. Effects on driving may include:
                                                                        Driving Limit Begins
                                                                                                             Straddling lanes.
                                                                               Driving Skills Significantly
                                                                           Affected                          Quick, jerky starts.

                                                                        Criminal Penalties                   Not signaling, failure to use lights.

                                                                                                             Running stop signs and red lights.

                                                                                                             Improper passing (See Figure 2.23).

4 .15 .12 .11 .09 .08 .08 .07 .06

5 .19 .16 .13 .12 .11 .09 .09 .08

6 .23 .19 .16 .14 .13 .11 .10 .09

7 .26 .22 .19 .16 .15 .13 .12 .11                                          Legally Intoxicated
                                                                        Criminal Penalties
8 .30 .25 .21 .19 .17 .15 .14 .13

9 .34 .28 .24 .21 .19 .17 .15 .14

1  .38 .31 .27 .23 .21 .19  .17  .16
0

Subtract .01% for each 40 minutes of drinking. One drink
  is 1.5 oz. of 80 proof liquor, 12 oz. of beer, or 5 oz. of
                              table wine.

   Figure 2.22

All of the following drinks contain the same amount
of alcohol:
A 12-ounce glass of 5% beer.
A 5-ounce glass of 12% wine.
A 1 1/2-ounce shot of 80 proof liquor.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                                                                                             Page 2-41
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

       Effects Of Increasing                                  2.22.2 ­ Other Drugs
      Blood Alcohol Content
                                                              Besides alcohol, other legal and illegal drugs are
Blood Alcohol Content is the amount of alcohol in             being used more often. Laws prohibit possession
your blood recorded in milligrams of alcohol per              or use of many drugs while on duty. They prohibit
100 milliliters of blood. Your BAC depends on the             being under the influence of any "controlled
amount of blood (which increases with weight)                 substance," amphetamines (including "pep pills,"
and the amount of alcohol you consume over time               "uppers," and "bennies"), narcotics, or any other
(how fast you drink). The faster you drink, the               substance, which can make the driver unsafe. This
higher your BAC, as the liver can only handle                 could include a variety of prescription and over-the-
about one drink per hour--the rest builds up in               counter drugs (cold medicines), which may make
your blood.                                                   the driver drowsy or otherwise affect safe driving
                                                              ability. However, possession and use of a drug
BAC   Effects on Body            Effects on                   given to a driver by a doctor is permitted if the
                            Driving Condition                 doctor informs the driver that it will not affect safe
                                                              driving ability.
.02   Mellow feeling,       Less inhibited.
      slight body warmth.                                     Pay attention to warning labels for legitimate drugs
                                                              and medicines, and to doctor's orders regarding
.05   Noticeable            Less alert, less                  possible effects. Stay away from illegal drugs.
      relaxation.           self-focused,
                            coordination                      Don't use any drug that hides fatigue--the only cure
                            impairment begins.                for fatigue is rest. Alcohol can make the effects of
                                                              other drugs much worse. The safest rule is don't
.08   Definite impairment   Drunk driving limit,              mix drugs with driving at all.
      in coordination &     impaired
      judgment              coordination &                    Use of drugs can lead to traffic accidents resulting
                            judgment.                         in death, injury, and property damage.
                                                              Furthermore, it can lead to arrest, fines, and jail
      Noisy, possible                                         sentences. It can also mean the end of a person's
                                                              driving career.
.10*  embarrassing          Reduction in
      behavior, mood        reaction time.                    2.22.3 ­ Illness

      swings.                                                 Once in a while, you may become so ill that you
                                                              cannot operate a motor vehicle safely. If this
          Impaired balance &                                  happens to you, you must not drive. However, in
.15 movement, clearly Unable to drive.                        case of an emergency, you may drive to the
                                                              nearest place where you can safely stop.
          drunk.
                                                              Staying Alert and Fit to Drive
.30   Many lose
      consciousness.                                          Driving a vehicle for long hours is tiring. Even the
                                                              best of drivers will become less alert. However,
          Most lose                                           there are things that good drivers do to help stay
.40 consciousness,                                            alert and safe.

          some die.                                           Get Enough Sleep. Sleep is not like money. You
                                                              can't save it up ahead of time and you can't borrow
.50   Breathing stops,                                        it. But, just as with money, you can go into debt
      many die.                                               with it. If you don't sleep enough, you owe more
                                                              sleep to yourself. This debt can only be paid off by
BAC of .10 means that 1/10 of 1 % (or 1/1000) of              sleeping. You can't overcome it with willpower, and
your total blood content is alcohol.                          it won't go away by itself. The average person
                                                              needs seven or eight hours of sleep every 24
                   Figure 2.23                                hours. Leaving on a long trip when you're already
                                                              tired is dangerous. If you have a long trip
These effects mean increased chances of a crash
and chances of losing your driver's license.                                                                                        Page 2-42
Accident statistics show that the chance of a crash
is much greater for drivers who have been drinking
than for drivers who have not.

How Alcohol Affects Driving. All drivers are
affected by drinking alcohol. Alcohol affects
judgment, vision, coordination, and reaction time. It
causes serious driving errors, such as:

Increased reaction time to hazards.

Driving too fast or too slow.

Driving in the wrong lane.

Running over the curb.

Weaving.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

scheduled, make sure that you get enough sleep                Take Breaks. Short breaks can keep you alert. But
before you go.                                                the time to take them is before you feel really
                                                              drowsy or tired. Stop often. Walk around and
Schedule Trips Safely. Try to arrange your                    inspect your vehicle. It may help to do some
schedule so you are not in sleep debt before a                physical exercises.
long trip. Your body gets used to sleeping during
certain hours. If you are driving during those hours,         Be sure to take a mid-afternoon break and plan to
you will be less alert. If possible, try to schedule          sleep between midnight and 6 a.m.
trips for the hours you are normally awake. Many
heavy motor vehicle accidents occur between                   Recognize the Danger Signals of Drowsy
midnight and 6 a.m. Tired drivers can easily fall             Driving. Sleep is not voluntary. If you're drowsy,
asleep at these times, especially if they don't               you can fall asleep and never even know it. If you
regularly drive at those hours. Trying to push on             are drowsy, you are likely to have micro sleeps­
and finish a long trip at these times can be very             brief naps that last around four or five seconds. At
dangerous.                                                    55 miles an hour, that's more than 100 yards, and
                                                              plenty of time for a crash. Even if you are not
Exercise Regularly. Resistance to fatigue and                 aware of being drowsy, if you have a sleep debt
improved sleep are among the benefits of regular              you are still at risk. Here are a few ways to tell if
exercise. Try to incorporate exercise into your daily         you're about to fall asleep. If you experience any of
life. Instead of sitting and watching TV in your              these danger signs, take them as a warning that
sleeper, walk or jog a few laps around the parking            you could fall asleep without meaning to.
lot. A little bit of daily exercise will give you energy
throughout the day.                                           Your eyes close or go out of focus by themselves.

Eat Healthy. It is often hard for drivers to find             You have trouble keeping your head up.
healthy food. But with a little extra effort, you can
eat healthy, even on the road. Try to find                    You can't stop yawning.
restaurants with healthy, balanced meals. If you
must eat at fast-food restaurants, pick low-fat               You have wandering, disconnected thoughts.
items. Another simple way to reduce your caloric
intake is to eliminate fattening snacks. Instead, try         You don't remember driving the last few miles.
fruit or vegetables.
                                                              You drift between lanes, tailgate, or miss traffic
Avoid Medication. Many medicines can make you                 signs.
sleepy. Those that do have a label warning against
operating vehicles or machinery. The most                     You keep jerking the truck back into the lane.
common medicine of this type is an ordinary cold
pill. If you have to drive with a cold, you are better        You have drifted off the road and narrowly missed
off suffering from the cold than from the effects of          crashing.
the medicine.
                                                              If you have even one of these symptoms, you may
Visit Your Doctor. Regular checkups literally can             be in danger of falling asleep. Pull off the road in a
be lifesavers. Illnesses such as diabetes, heart              safe place and take a nap.
disease, and skin and colon cancer can be
detected easily and treated if found in time.                 When You Do Become Sleepy
You should consult your physician or a local sleep
disorder center if you suffer from frequent daytime           When you are sleepy, trying to "push on" is far
sleepiness, have difficulty sleeping at night, take           more dangerous than most drivers think. It is a
frequent naps, fall asleep at strange times, snore            major cause of fatal accidents. Here are some
loudly, gasp and choke in your sleep, and/or wake             important rules to follow.
up feeling as though you have not had enough
sleep.                                                        Stop to Sleep. When your body needs sleep,
                                                              sleep is the only thing that will work. If you have to
While You Are Driving                                         make a stop anyway, make it whenever you feel
                                                              the first signs of sleepiness, even if it is earlier than
Keep Cool. A hot, poorly ventilated vehicle can               you planned. By getting up a little earlier the next
make you sleepy. Keep the window or vent                      day, you can keep on schedule without the danger
cracked open or use the air conditioner, if you               of driving while you are not alert.
have one.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-43
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Take a Nap. If you can't stop for the night, at least                Hazard Class Definitions
pull off at a safe place, such as a rest area or truck
stop, and take a nap. A nap as short as a half-hour           Class  Class Name          Example
will do more to overcome fatigue than a half-hour             1
coffee stop.                                                  2                          Ammunition,
                                                              3
Avoid Drugs. There are no drugs that can                      4      Explosives          Dynamite,
overcome being tired. While they may keep you                 5
awake for a while, they won't make you alert. And             6                          Fireworks
eventually, you'll be even more tired than if you             7
hadn't taken them at all. Sleep is the only thing that        8      Gases               Propane, Oxygen,
can overcome fatigue.                                         9                          Helium

Do Not. Do not rely on coffee or another source of            None   Flammable           Gasoline, Acetone
caffeine to keep you awake. Do not count on the
radio, an open window, or other tricks to keep you            None   Flammable           Matches, Fuses
awake.                                                               Solids

2.23­ Hazardous Materials Rules For All                                                  Ammonium
Commercial Drivers
                                                                     Oxidizers           Nitrate, Hydrogen
All drivers should know something about
hazardous materials. You must be able to                                                 Peroxide
recognize hazardous cargo, and you must know
whether or not you can haul it without having a                      Poisons             Pesticides,
hazardous materials endorsement on your CDL                                              Arsenic
license.
                                                                     Radioactive         Uranium,
2.23.1 ­ What Are Hazardous Materials?                                                   Plutonium

Hazardous materials are products that pose a risk                    Corrosives          Hydrochloric Acid,
to health, safety, and property during                                                   Battery Fluid
transportation. See Figure 2.24.
                                                                     Miscellaneous       Formaldehyde,
2.23.2 ­ Why Are There Rules?                                        Hazardous           Asbestos
                                                                     Materials
You must follow the many rules about transporting
hazardous materials. The intent of the rules is to:                  ORM-D (Other

Contain the product.                                                 Regulated           Hair Spray or

Communicate the risk.                                                Material-           Charcoal

Ensure safe drivers and equipment.                                   Domestic)

To Contain the Product. Many hazardous                               Combustible         Fuel Oils, Lighter
products can injure or kill on contact. To protect
drivers and others from contact, the rules tell                      Liquids             Fluid
shippers how to package safely. Similar rules tell
drivers how to load, transport, and unload bulk                             Figure 2.24
tanks. These are containment rules.
                                                              After an accident or hazardous material spill or
To Communicate the Risk. The shipper uses a                   leak, you may be injured and unable to
shipping paper and diamond shaped hazard labels               communicate the hazards of the materials you are
to warn dockworkers and drivers of the risk.                  transporting. Firefighters and police can prevent or
                                                              reduce the amount of damage or injury at the
                                                              scene if they know what hazardous materials are
                                                              being transported. Your life, and the lives of others,
                                                              may depend on quickly locating the hazardous
                                                              materials shipping papers. For that reason, you
                                                              must identify shipping papers related to hazardous
                                                              materials or keep them on top of other shipping
                                                              papers. You must also keep shipping papers:

                                                              In a pouch on the driver's door, or

                                                              In clear view within reach while driving, or

                                                              On the driver's seat when out of the vehicle.

                                                              2.23.3 ­ Lists of Regulated Products

                                                              Placards are used to warn others of hazardous
                                                              materials. Placards are signs put on the outside of
                                                              a vehicle that identify the hazard class of the
                                                              cargo. A placarded vehicle must have at least four
                                                              identical placards. They are put on the front, rear,
                                                              and both sides. Placards must be readable from all
                                                              four directions. They must be at least 9.8 (250mm)
                                                              inches square, turned upright on a point, in a
                                                              diamond shape. Cargo tanks and other bulk

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                                                                  Page 2-44
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

packaging display the identification number of their          endorsement. To get the required endorsement,
contents on placards or orange panels.                        you must pass a written test on material found in
                                                              Section 9 of this manual. A tank endorsement is
Identification Numbers are a four digit code used             required for any commercial vehicle that is
by first responders to identify hazardous materials.          designed to transport any liquid or gaseous
An identification number may be used to identify              materials in a tank or tanks having an individual
more than one chemical on shipping papers. The                rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an
identification number will be preceded by the                 aggregate capacity of 1,000 gallons or more that is
letters "NA" or "UN". The US DOT Emergency                    either permanently or temporarily attached to the
Response Guidebook (ERG) lists the chemicals                  vehicle or chassis. The liquid or gas does not have
and the identification numbers assigned to them.              to be a hazardous material.

Not all vehicles carrying hazardous materials need            Drivers who need the hazardous materials
to have placards. The rules about placards are                endorsement must learn the placard rules. If you
given in Section 9 of this manual. You can drive a            do not know if your vehicle needs placards, ask
vehicle that carries hazardous materials if it does           your employer. Never drive a vehicle needing
not require placards. If it requires placards, you            placards unless you have the hazardous materials
cannot drive it unless your driver license has the            endorsement. To do so is a crime. When stopped,
hazardous materials endorsement. See Figure                   you will be cited and you will not be allowed to
2.25.                                                         drive your truck. It will cost you time and money. A
                                                              failure to placard when needed may risk your life
                                                              and others if you have an accident. Emergency
                                                              help will not know of your hazardous cargo.

                                                              Hazardous materials drivers must also know which
                                                              products they can load together, and which they
                                                              cannot. These rules are also in Section 9. Before
                                                              loading a truck with more than one type of product,
                                                              you must know if it is safe to load them together. If
                                                              you do not know, ask your employer and consult
                                                              the regulations.

                    Figure 2.25                                    Subsections 2.22, 2.23 and 2.24
                                                                           Test Your Knowledge
The rules require all drivers of placarded vehicles
to learn how to safely load and transport                     1. Common medicines for colds can make you
hazardous products. They must have a commercial                    sleepy. True or False?
driver license with the hazardous materials
                                                              2. What should you do if you become sleepy
                                                                   while driving?

                                                              3. Coffee and a little fresh air will help a drinker
                                                                   sober up. True or False?

                                                              4. What is a hazardous materials placard?
                                                              5. Why are placards used?
                                                              6. What is "sleep debt"?
                                                              7. What are the danger signals of drowsy driving?

                                                              These questions may be on the test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read subsections 2.22 and
                                                              2.23.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-45
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                 This page left intentionally blank.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-46
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 3                                          After you have driven for 3 hours or 150 miles.
TRANSPORTING CARGO
                                                              After every break you take during driving.
             SAFELY
                                                              Federal, state, and local regulations for commercial
This Section Covers                                           vehicle weight, securing cargo, covering loads, and
                                                              where you can drive large vehicles vary from place
 Inspecting Cargo                                             to place. Know the rules where you will be driving.
 Cargo Weight and Balance
 Securing Cargo                                               3.2 ­ Weight and Balance
 Cargo Needing Special Attention
                                                              You are responsible for not being overloaded. The
This section tells you about hauling cargo safely.            following are some definitions of weight you should
You must understand basic cargo safety rules to               know.
get a CDL.
                                                              3.2.1 ­ Definitions You Should Know
If you load cargo wrong or do not secure it, it can
be a danger to others and yourself. Loose cargo               Gross Vehicle Weight (GVW). The total weight of
that falls off a vehicle can cause traffic problems           a single vehicle plus its load.
and others could be hurt or killed. Loose cargo
could hurt or kill you during a quick stop or crash.          Gross Combination Weight (GCW). The total
Your vehicle could be damaged by an overload.                 weight of a powered unit, plus trailer(s), plus the
Steering could be affected by how a vehicle is                cargo.
loaded, making it more difficult to control the
vehicle.                                                      Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR). The value
                                                              specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight
Whether or not you load and secure the cargo                  of a single vehicle.
yourself, you are responsible for:
                                                              Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR). The
Inspecting your cargo.                                        value specified by the manufacturer of the power
                                                              unit, if the value is displayed on the Federal Motor
Recognizing overloads and poorly balanced                     Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS) certification
weight.                                                       label; or the sum of the gross vehicle weight
                                                              ratings (GVWRs) or the gross vehicle weights
Knowing your cargo is properly secured and does               (GVWs) of the power unit and the towed unit(s), or
not obscure your view ahead or to the sides.                  any combination thereof, that produces the highest
                                                              value.
Knowing your cargo does not restrict your access
to emergency equipment.                                       (The underlined and italicized text above is for
                                                              use by roadside enforcement only to determine
If you intend to carry hazardous material that                whether the driver/vehicle is subject to CDL
requires placards on your vehicle, you will also              regulations. It is not used to determine
need to have a hazardous materials endorsement.               whether a vehicle is representative for the
Section 9 of this manual has the information you              purposes of Skills testing).
need to pass the hazardous materials test.
                                                              Axle Weight. The weight transmitted to the ground
                                                              by one axle or one set of axles.

3.1 ­ Inspecting Cargo                                        Tire Load. The maximum safe weight a tire can
                                                              carry at a specified pressure. This rating is stated
As part of your Vehicle inspection, make sure the             on the side of each tire.
truck is not overloaded and the cargo is balanced
and secured properly.                                         Suspension Systems. Suspension systems have
                                                              a manufacturer's weight capacity rating.
After Starting. Inspect the cargo and its securing
devices again within the first 50 miles after                 Coupling Device Capacity. Coupling devices are
beginning a trip. Make any adjustments needed.                rated for the maximum weight they can pull and/or
                                                              carry.
Re-check. Re-check the cargo and securing
devices as often as necessary during a trip to keep           3.2.2 ­ Legal Weight Limits
the load secure. You need to inspect again:
                                                                                                                                     Page 3-1
Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

You must keep weights within legal limits. States
have maximums for GVWRs, GCWRs, and axle
weights. Often, maximum axle weights are set by a
bridge formula. A bridge formula permits less
maximum axle weight for axles that are closer
together. This is to prevent overloading bridges
and roadways.

Overloading can have bad effects on steering,
braking, and speed control. Overloaded trucks
have to go very slowly on upgrades. Worse, they
may gain too much speed on downgrades.
Stopping distance increases. Brakes can fail when
forced to work too hard.

During bad weather or in mountains, it may not be
safe to operate at legal maximum weights. Take
this into account before driving.

3.2.3 ­ Don't Be Top-heavy                                                               Figure 3.1

The height of the vehicle's center of gravity is very         3.3.2 ­ Cargo Tie-down
important for safe handling. A high center of gravity
(cargo piled up high or heavy cargo on top) means             On flatbed trailers or trailers without sides, cargo
you are more likely to tip over. It is most dangerous         must be secured to keep it from shifting or falling
in curves, or if you have to swerve to avoid a                off. In closed vans, tie-downs can also be
hazard. It is very important to distribute the cargo          important to prevent cargo shifting that may affect
so it is as low as possible. Put the heaviest parts of        the handling of the vehicle. Tie-downs must be of
the cargo under the lightest parts.                           the proper type and proper strength. Federal
                                                              regulations require the aggregate working load limit
3.2.4 ­ Balance the Weight                                    of any securement system used to secure an
                                                              article or group of articles against movement must
Poor weight balance can make vehicle handling                 be at least one-half times the weight of the article
unsafe. Too much weight on the steering axle can              or group of articles. Proper tie-down equipment
cause hard steering. It can damage the steering               must be used, including ropes, straps, chains, and
axle and tires. Under-loaded front axles (caused by           tensioning devices (winches, ratchets, clinching
shifting weight too far to the rear) can make the             components). Tie-downs must be attached to the
steering axle weight too light to steer safely. Too           vehicle correctly (hooks, bolts, rails, rings). See
little weight on the driving axles can cause poor             figure 3.2.
traction. The drive wheels may spin easily. During
bad weather, the truck may not be able to keep
going. Weight that is loaded so there is a high
center of gravity causes greater chance of rollover.
On flat bed vehicles, there is also a greater chance
that the load will shift to the side or fall off. See
Figure 3.1.

3.3 ­ Securing Cargo                                          Figure 3.2

3.3.1 ­ Blocking and Bracing

Blocking is used in the front, back, and/or sides of
a piece of cargo to keep it from sliding. Blocking is
shaped to fit snugly against cargo. It is secured to
the cargo deck to prevent cargo movement.
Bracing is also used to prevent movement of
cargo. Bracing goes from the upper part of the
cargo to the floor and/or walls of the cargo
compartment.

Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely                                     Page 3-2
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Cargo should have at least one tie-down for each              3.4.2 ­ Hanging Meat
ten feet of cargo. Make sure you have enough tie-
downs to meet this need. No matter how small the              Hanging meat (suspended beef, pork, lamb) in a
cargo, it should have at least two tie-downs.                 refrigerated truck can be a very unstable load with
                                                              a high center of gravity. Particular caution is
There are special requirements for securing                   needed on sharp curves such as off ramps and on
various heavy pieces of metal. Find out what they             ramps. Go slowly.
are if you are to carry such loads.
                                                              3.4.3 ­ Livestock
3.3.3 ­ Header Boards
                                                              Livestock can move around in a trailer, causing
Front-end header boards ("headache racks")                    unsafe handling. With less than a full load, use
protect you from your cargo in case of a crash or             false bulkheads to keep livestock bunched
emergency stop. Make sure the front-end structure             together. Even when bunched, special care is
is in good condition. The front-end structure should          necessary because livestock can lean on curves.
block the forward movement of any cargo you                   This shifts the center of gravity and makes rollover
carry.                                                        more likely.

3.3.4 ­ Covering Cargo                                        3.4.4 ­ Oversized Loads

There are two basic reasons for covering cargo:               Over-length, over-width, and/or overweight loads
                                                              require special transit permits. Driving is usually
To protect people from spilled cargo.                         limited to certain times. Special equipment may be
                                                              necessary such as "wide load" signs, flashing
To protect the cargo from weather.                            lights, flags, etc. Such loads may require a police
                                                              escort or pilot vehicles bearing warning signs
Spill protection is a safety requirement in many              and/or flashing lights. These special loads require
states. Be familiar with the laws in the states you           special driving care.
drive in.

You should look at your cargo covers in the mirrors                                Section 3
from time to time while driving. A flapping cover                          Test Your Knowledge
can tear loose, uncovering the cargo, and possibly
block your view or someone else's.                            1. What four things related to cargo are drivers
                                                                   responsible for?
3.3.5 ­ Sealed and Containerized Loads
                                                              2. How often must you stop while on the road to
Containerized loads generally are used when                        check your cargo?
freight is carried part way by rail or ship. Delivery
by truck occurs at the beginning and/or end of the            3. How is Gross Combination Weight Rating
journey. Some containers have their own tiedown                    different from Gross Combination Weight?
devices or locks that attach directly to a special
frame. Others have to be loaded onto flatbed                  4. Name two situations where legal maximum
trailers. They must be properly secured just like                  weights may not be safe.
any other cargo.
                                                              5. What can happen if you don't have enough
You cannot inspect sealed loads, but you should                    weight on the front axle?
check that you don't exceed gross weight and axle
weight limits.                                                6. What is the minimum number of tie-downs for
                                                                   any flatbed load?
3.4 ­ Cargo Needing Special Attention
                                                              7. What is the minimum number of tie-downs for
3.4.1 ­ Dry Bulk                                                   a 20-foot load?

Dry bulk tanks require special care because they              8. Name the two basic reasons for covering
have a high center of gravity, and the load can                    cargo on an open bed.
shift. Be extremely cautious (slow and careful)
going around curves and making sharp turns.                   9. What must you check before transporting a
                                                                   sealed load?

                                                              These questions may be on your test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read Section 3.

Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely                         Page 3-3
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                     THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.

Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely                         Page 3-4
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 4                                          Windshield wiper or wipers.
      TRANSPORTING
  PASSENGERS SAFELY                                           Rear-vision mirror or mirrors.

This Section Covers                                           Coupling devices (if present).

 Vehicle Inspection                                           Wheels and rims.
 Loading
 On the Road                                                  Emergency equipment.
 After-trip Vehicle Inspection
 Prohibited Practices                                         Make sure your bus has the fire extinguisher and
 Use of Brake-door Interlocks                                 emergency reflectors (3 reflective triangles or at
                                                              least 6 fusees or 3 liquid burning flares) required
Bus drivers must have a commercial driver license             by law. The bus must also have spare electrical
if they drive a vehicle designed to seat more than            fuses, unless equipped with circuit breakers.
16 or more persons, including the driver.
                                                              4.1.2 ­ Access Doors and Panels
Bus drivers must have a passenger endorsement
on their commercial driver license. To get the                As you check the outside of the bus, close any
endorsement you must pass a knowledge test on                 open emergency exits. Also, close any open
Sections 2 and 4 of this manual. (If your bus has             access panels (for baggage, restroom service,
air brakes, you must also pass a knowledge test on            engine, etc.) before driving.
Section 5.) You must also pass the skills tests
required for the class of vehicle you drive.                  4.1.3 ­ Bus Interior

School bus drivers must have a school bus (S)                 People sometimes damage unattended buses.
endorsement which requires an additional                      Always check the interior of the bus before driving
knowledge test and possibly skills test. See                  to ensure rider safety. Aisles and stairwells should
Section 10.                                                   always be clear. The following parts of your bus
                                                              must be in safe working condition:
4.1 ­ Vehicle Inspection
                                                              Each handhold and railing.
Before driving your bus, you must be sure it is
safe. You must review the inspection report made              Floor covering.
by the previous driver. Only if defects reported
earlier have been certified as repaired or not                Signaling devices, including the restroom
needed to be repaired, should you sign the                    emergency buzzer, if the bus has a restroom.
previous driver's report. This is your certification
that the defects reported earlier have been fixed.            Emergency exit handles.

4.1.1 ­ Vehicle Systems                                       The seats must be safe for riders. All seats must
                                                              be securely fastened to the bus.
Make sure these things are in good working order
before driving:                                               Never drive with an open emergency exit door or
                                                              window. The "Emergency Exit" sign on an
Service brakes, including air hose couplings (if              emergency door must be clearly visible. If there is
your bus has a trailer or semitrailer).                       a red emergency door light, it must work. Turn it on
                                                              at night or any other time you use your outside
Parking brake.                                                lights.

Steering mechanism.                                           4.1.4 ­ Roof Hatches

Lights and reflectors.                                        You may lock some emergency roof hatches in a
                                                              partly open position for fresh air. Do not leave them
Tires (front wheels must not have recapped or re-             open as a regular practice. Keep in mind the bus's
grooved tires).                                               higher clearance while driving with them open.

Horn.                                                         4.1.5 ­ Use Your Seatbelt!

                                                              The driver's seat should have a seat belt. Always
                                                              use it for safety.

                                                              4.2 ­ Loading and Trip Start

                                                              Do not allow riders to leave carry-on baggage in a
                                                              doorway or aisle. There should be nothing in the

Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely                    Page 4-1
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

aisle that might trip other riders. Secure baggage            4.2.2 ­ Forbidden Hazardous Materials
and freight in ways that avoid damage and:
                                                              Buses may carry small-arms ammunition labeled
Allow the driver to move freely and easily.                   ORM-D, emergency hospital supplies, and drugs.
                                                              You can carry small amounts of some other
Allow riders to exit by any window or door in an              hazardous materials if the shipper cannot send
emergency.                                                    them any other way. Buses must never carry:

Protect riders from injury if carry-ons fall or shift.        Division 2.3 poison gas, liquid Class 6 poison, tear
                                                              gas, irritating material.
4.2.1 ­ Hazardous Materials
                                                              More than 100 pounds of solid Class 6 poisons.
Watch for cargo or baggage containing hazardous
materials. Most hazardous materials cannot be                 Explosives in the space occupied by people,
carried on a bus.                                             except small arms ammunition.

The Federal Hazardous Materials Table shows                   Labeled radioactive materials in the space
which materials are hazardous. They pose a risk to            occupied by people.
health, safety, and property during transportation.
The rules require shippers to mark containers of              More than 500 pounds total of allowed hazardous
hazardous material with the material's name,                  materials, and no more than 100 pounds of any
identification number, and hazard label. There are            one class.
nine different four-inch, diamond-shaped hazard
labels. See Figure 4.1. Watch for the diamond-                Riders sometimes board a bus with an unlabeled
shaped labels. Do not transport any hazardous                 hazardous material. Do not allow riders to carry on
material unless you are sure the rules allow it.              common hazards such as car batteries or gasoline.

       Hazard Class Definitions                               4.2.3 ­ Standee Line

Class  Class Name     Example                                 No rider may stand forward of the rear of the
1                                                             driver's seat. Buses designed to allow standing
2                     Ammunition,                             must have a two-inch line on the floor or some
3                                                             other means of showing riders where they cannot
4      Explosives     Dynamite,                               stand. This is called the standee line. All standing
5                                                             riders must stay behind it.
6                     Fireworks
7                                                             4.2.4 ­ At Your Destination
8      Gases          Propane, Oxygen,
9                     Helium                                  When arriving at the destination or intermediate
                                                              stops announce:
None   Flammable      Gasoline,
                      Acetone                                 The location.
None
       Flammable      Matches, Fuses                          Reason for stopping.
       Solids
                                                              Next departure time.
                      Ammonium
                                                              Bus number.
       Oxidizers      Nitrate, Hydrogen
                                                              Remind riders to take carry-ons with them if they
                      Peroxide                                get off the bus. If the aisle is on a lower level than
                                                              the seats, remind riders of the step-down. It is best
       Poisons        Pesticides,                             to tell them before coming to a complete stop.
                      Arsenic
                                                              Charter bus drivers should not allow riders on the
       Radioactive    Uranium,                                bus until departure time. This will help prevent theft
                      Plutonium                               or vandalism of the bus.

       Corrosives     Hydrochloric Acid,                      4.3 ­ On the Road
                      Battery Fluid
                                                              4.3.1 ­ Passenger Supervision
       Miscellaneous  Formaldehyde,
       Hazardous      Asbestos                                Many charter and intercity carriers have passenger
       Materials                                              comfort and safety rules. Mention rules about
                                                              smoking, drinking, or use of radio and tape players
       ORM-D (Other

       Regulated      Hair Spray or

       Material-      Charcoal

       Domestic)

       Combustible    Fuel Oils, Lighter

       Liquids        Fluid

                  Figure 4.1

Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely                    Page 4-2
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

at the start of the trip. Explaining the rules at the         Listen and look in both directions for trains. You
start will help to avoid trouble later on.                    should open your forward door if it improves your
                                                              ability to see or hear an approaching train.
While driving, scan the interior of your bus as well
as the road ahead, to the sides, and to the rear.             Before crossing after a train has passed, make
You may have to remind riders about rules, or to              sure there isn't another train coming in the other
keep arms and heads inside the bus.                           direction on other tracks.

4.3.2 ­ At Stops                                              If your bus has a manual transmission, never
                                                              change gears while crossing the tracks.
Riders can stumble when getting on or off, and
when the bus starts or stops. Caution riders to               You do not have to stop, but must slow down and
watch their step when leaving the bus. Wait for               carefully check for other vehicles:
them to sit down or brace themselves before
starting. Starting and stopping should be as                  At streetcar crossings.
smooth as possible to avoid rider injury.
                                                              Where a policeman or flagman is directing traffic.
Occasionally, you may have a drunk or disruptive
rider. You must ensure this rider's safety as well as         If a traffic signal is green.
that of others. Don't discharge such riders where it
would be unsafe for them. It may be safer at the              At crossings marked as "exempt" or "abandoned."
next scheduled stop or a well-lighted area where
there are other people. Many carriers have                    4.3.6 ­ Drawbridges
guidelines for handling disruptive riders.
                                                              Stop at Drawbridges. Stop at drawbridges that do
4.3.3 ­ Common Accidents                                      not have a signal light or traffic control attendant.
                                                              Stop at least 50 feet before the draw of the bridge.
The Most Common Bus Accidents. Bus                            Look to make sure the draw is completely closed
accidents often happen at intersections. Use                  before crossing. You do not need to stop, but must
caution, even if a signal or stop sign controls other         slow down and make sure it's safe, when:
traffic. School and mass transit buses sometimes
scrape off mirrors or hit passing vehicles when               There is a traffic light showing green.
pulling out from a bus stop. Remember the
clearance your bus needs, and watch for poles and             The bridge has an attendant or traffic officer who
tree limbs at stops. Know the size of the gap your            controls traffic whenever the bridge opens.
bus needs to accelerate and merge with traffic.
Wait for the gap to open before leaving the stop.             4.4 ­ After-trip Vehicle Inspection
Never assume other drivers will brake to give you
room when you signal or start to pull out.                    Inspect your bus at the end of each shift. If you
                                                              work for an interstate carrier, you must complete a
4.3.4 ­ Speed on Curves                                       written inspection report for each bus driven. The
                                                              report must specify each bus and list any defect
Crashes on curves that kill people and destroy                that would affect safety or result in a breakdown. If
buses result from excessive speed, often when                 there are no defects, the report should say so.
rain or snow has made the road slippery. Every
banked curve has a safe "design speed." In good               Riders sometimes damage safety-related parts
weather, the posted speed is safe for cars but it             such as handholds, seats, emergency exits, and
may be too high for many buses. With good                     windows. If you report this damage at the end of a
traction, the bus may roll over; with poor traction, it       shift, mechanics can make repairs before the bus
might slide off the curve. Reduce speed for curves!           goes out again. Mass transit drivers should also
                                                              make sure passenger signaling devices and brake-
If your bus leans toward the outside on a banked              door interlocks work properly.
curve, you are driving too fast.
                                                              4.5 ­ Prohibited Practices
4.3.5 ­ Railroad-highway Crossing/ Stops
                                                              Avoid fueling your bus with riders on board unless
Stop at RR Crossings:                                         absolutely necessary. Never refuel in a closed
                                                              building with riders on board.
Stop your bus between 15 and 50 feet before
railroad crossings.                                           Don't talk with riders, or engage in any other
                                                              distracting activity, while driving.
Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely
Version: July 2017                                            Do not tow or push a disabled bus with riders
                                                              aboard the vehicle, unless getting off would be
                                                              unsafe. Only tow or push the bus to the nearest

                                                                                                                                     Page 4-3
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System  Page 4-4

safe spot to discharge passengers. Follow your
employer's guidelines on towing or pushing
disabled buses.

4.6 ­ Use of Brake-door Interlocks

Urban mass transit coaches may have a brake and
accelerator interlock system. The interlock applies
the brakes and holds the throttle in idle position
when the rear door is open. The interlock releases
when you close the rear door. Do not use this
safety feature in place of the parking brake.

                     Section 4
             Test Your Knowledge

1. Name some things to check in the interior of a
     bus during a Vehicle inspection.

2. What are some hazardous materials you can
     transport by bus?

3. What are some hazardous materials you can't
     transport by bus?

4. What is a standee line?
5. Does it matter where you make a disruptive

     passenger get off the bus?
6. How far from a railroad crossing should you

     stop?
7. When must you stop before crossing a

     drawbridge?
8. Describe from memory the "prohibited

     practices" listed in the manual.
9. The rear door of a transit bus has to be open

     to put on the parking brake. True or False?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read Section 4.

Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 5                                          5.1.2 ­ Air Compressor Governor
         AIR BRAKES
                                                              The governor controls when the air compressor will
This Section Covers                                           pump air into the air storage tanks. When air tank
                                                              pressure rises to the "cut-out" level (around 125
 Air Brake System Parts                                       pounds per-square-inch or "psi"), the governor
 Dual Air Brake Systems                                       stops the compressor from pumping air. When the
 Inspecting Air Brakes                                        tank pressure falls to the "cut-in" pressure (around
 Using Air Brakes                                             100 psi), the governor allows the compressor to
                                                              start pumping again.
This section tells you about air brakes. If you want
to drive a truck or bus with air brakes, or pull a            5.1.3 ­ Air Storage Tanks
trailer with air brakes, you need to read this
section. If you want to pull a trailer with air brakes,       Air storage tanks are used to hold compressed air.
you also need to read Section 6, Combination                  The number and size of air tanks varies among
Vehicles.                                                     vehicles. The tanks will hold enough air to allow
                                                              the brakes to be used several times, even if the
Air brakes use compressed air to make the brakes              compressor stops working.
work. Air brakes are a good and safe way of
stopping large and heavy vehicles, but the brakes             5.1.4 ­ Air Tank Drains
must be well maintained and used properly.
                                                              Compressed air usually has some water and some
Air brakes are really three different braking                 compressor oil in it, which is bad for the air brake
systems: service brake, parking brake, and                    system. For example, the water can freeze in cold
emergency brake.                                              weather and cause brake failure. The water and oil
                                                              tend to collect in the bottom of the air tank. Be sure
The service brake system applies and releases the             that you drain the air tanks completely. Each air
brakes when you use the brake pedal during                    tank is equipped with a drain valve in the bottom.
normal driving.                                               There are two types:

The parking brake system applies and releases the             Manually operated by turning a quarter turn or by
parking brakes when you use the parking brake                 pulling a cable. You must drain the tanks yourself
control.                                                      at the end of each day of driving. See Figure 5.1.

The emergency brake system uses parts of the                  Automatic--the water and oil are automatically
service and parking brake systems to stop the                 expelled. These tanks may be equipped for
vehicle in a brake system failure.                            manual draining as well.

The parts of these systems are discussed in                   Automatic air tanks are available with electric
greater detail below.                                         heating devices. These help prevent freezing of
                                                              the automatic drain in cold weather.

5.1 ­ The Parts of an Air Brake System

There are many parts to an air brake system. You
should know about the parts discussed here.

5.1.1 ­ Air Compressor                                        Figure 5.1

The air compressor pumps air into the air storage
tanks (reservoirs). The air compressor is
connected to the engine through gears or a v-belt.
The compressor may be air cooled or may be
cooled by the engine cooling system. It may have
its own oil supply or be lubricated by engine oil. If
the compressor has its own oil supply, check the
oil level before driving.

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes                                                    Page 5-1
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

5.1.5 ­ Alcohol Evaporator                                    another and presses them against the inside of the
                                                              brake drum.When you release the brake pedal, the
Some air brake systems have an alcohol                        s-cam rotates back and a spring pulls the brake
evaporator to put alcohol into the air system. This           shoes away from the drum, letting the wheels roll
helps to reduce the risk of ice in air brake valves           freely again. See Figure 5.2.
and other parts during cold weather. Ice inside the
system can make the brakes stop working.

Check the alcohol container and fill up as
necessary, every day during cold weather. Daily air
tank drainage is still needed to get rid of water and
oil. (Unless the system has automatic drain
valves.)

5.1.6 ­ Safety Valve

A safety relief valve is installed in the first tank the
air compressor pumps air to. The safety valve
protects the tank and the rest of the system from
too much pressure. The valve is usually set to
open at 150 psi. If the safety valve releases air,
something is wrong. Have the fault fixed by a
mechanic.

5.1.7 ­ The Brake Pedal                                                                  Figure 5.2

You put on the brakes by pushing down the brake               Wedge Brakes. In this type of brake, the brake
pedal. (It is also called the foot valve or treadle           chamber push rod pushes a wedge directly
valve.) Pushing the pedal down harder applies                 between the ends of two brake shoes. This shoves
more air pressure. Letting up on the brake pedal              them apart and against the inside of the brake
reduces the air pressure and releases the brakes.             drum. Wedge brakes may have a single brake
Releasing the brakes lets some compressed air go              chamber, or two brake chambers, pushing wedges
out of the system, so the air pressure in the tanks           in at both ends of the brake shoes. Wedge type
is reduced. It must be made up by the air                     brakes may be self-adjusting or may require
compressor. Pressing and releasing the pedal                  manual adjustment.
unnecessarily can let air out faster than the
compressor can replace it. If the pressure gets too           Disc Brakes. In air-operated disc brakes, air
low, the brakes won't work.                                   pressure acts on a brake chamber and slack
                                                              adjuster, like s-cam brakes. But instead of the s-
5.1.8 ­ Foundation Brakes                                     cam, a "power screw" is used. The pressure of the
                                                              brake chamber on the slack adjuster turns the
Foundation brakes are used at each wheel. The                 power screw. The power screw clamps the disc or
most common type is the s-cam drum brake. The                 rotor between the brake lining pads of a caliper,
parts of the brake are discussed below.                       similar to a large c-clamp.

Brake Drums, Shoes, and Linings. Brake drums                  Wedge brakes and disc brakes are less common
are located on each end of the vehicle's axles. The           than s-cam brakes.
wheels are bolted to the drums. The braking
mechanism is inside the drum. To stop, the brake              5.1.9 ­ Supply Pressure Gauges
shoes and linings are pushed against the inside of
the drum. This causes friction, which slows the               All vehicles with air brakes have a pressure gauge
vehicle (and creates heat). The heat a drum can               connected to the air tank. If the vehicle has a dual
take without damage depends on how hard and                   air brake system, there will be a gauge for each
how long the brakes are used. Too much heat can               half of the system. (Or a single gauge with two
make the brakes stop working.                                 needles.) Dual systems will be discussed later.
                                                              These gauges tell you how much pressure is in the
S-cam Brakes. When you push the brake pedal,                  air tanks.
air is let into each brake chamber. Air pressure
pushes the rod out, moving the slack adjuster, thus                                                                                  Page 5-2
twisting the brake camshaft. This turns the s-cam
(so called because it is shaped like the letter "S").
The s-cam forces the brake shoes away from one

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

5.1.10 ­ Application Pressure Gauge                           psi or more application pressure). These valves
                                                              cannot be controlled by the driver.
This gauge shows how much air pressure you are
applying to the brakes. (This gauge is not on all             5.1.14 ­ Spring Brakes
vehicles.) Increasing application pressure to hold
the same speed means the brakes are fading. You               All trucks, truck tractors, and buses must be
should slow down and use a lower gear. The need               equipped with emergency brakes and parking
for increased pressure can also be caused by                  brakes. They must be held on by mechanical force
brakes out of adjustment, air leaks, or mechanical            (because air pressure can eventually leak away).
problems.                                                     Spring brakes are usually used to meet these
                                                              needs. When driving, powerful springs are held
5.1.11 ­ Low Air Pressure Warning                             back by air pressure. If the air pressure is
                                                              removed, the springs put on the brakes. A parking
A low air pressure warning signal is required on              brake control in the cab allows the driver to let the
vehicles with air brakes. A warning signal you can            air out of the spring brakes. This lets the springs
see must come on before the air pressure in the               put the brakes on. A leak in the air brake system,
tanks falls below 60 psi. (Or one half the                    which causes all the air to be lost, will also cause
compressor governor cutout pressure on older                  the springs to put on the brakes.
vehicles.) The warning is usually a red light. A
buzzer may also come on.                                      Tractor and straight truck spring brakes will come
                                                              fully on when air pressure drops to a range of 20 to
Another type of warning is the "wig wag." This                45 psi (typically 20 to 30 psi). Do not wait for the
device drops a mechanical arm into your view                  brakes to come on automatically. When the low air
when the pressure in the system drops below 60                pressure warning light and buzzer first come on,
psi. An automatic wig wag will rise out of your view          bring the vehicle to a safe stop right away, while
when the pressure in the system goes above 60                 you can still control the brakes.
psi. The manual reset type must be placed in the
"out of view" position manually. It will not stay in          The braking power of spring brakes depends on
place until the pressure in the system is above 60            the brakes being in adjustment. If the brakes are
psi.                                                          not adjusted properly, neither the regular brakes
                                                              nor the emergency/parking brakes will work right.
On large buses it is common for the low pressure
warning devices to signal at 80-85 psi.                       5.1.15 ­ Parking Brake Controls

5.1.12 ­ Stop Light Switch                                    In newer vehicles with air brakes, you put on the
                                                              parking brakes using a diamond-shaped, yellow,
Drivers behind you must be warned when you put                push-pull control knob. You pull the knob out to put
your brakes on. The air brake system does this                the parking brakes (spring brakes) on, and push it
with an electric switch that works by air pressure.           in to release them. On older vehicles, the parking
The switch turns on the brake lights when you put             brakes may be controlled by a lever. Use the
on the air brakes.                                            parking brakes whenever you park.

5.1.13 ­ Front Brake Limiting Valve                           Caution. Never push the brake pedal down when
                                                              the spring brakes are on. If you do, the brakes
Some older vehicles (made before 1975) have a                 could be damaged by the combined forces of the
front brake limiting valve and a control in the cab.          springs and the air pressure. Many brake systems
The control is usually marked "normal" and                    are designed so this will not happen. But not all
"slippery." When you put the control in the                   systems are set up that way, and those that are
"slippery" position, the limiting valve cuts the              may not always work. It is much better to develop
"normal" air pressure to the front brakes by half.            the habit of not pushing the brake pedal down
Limiting valves were used to reduce the chance of             when the spring brakes are on.
the front wheels skidding on slippery surfaces.
However, they actually reduce the stopping power              Modulating Control Valves. In some vehicles a
of the vehicle. Front wheel braking is good under             control handle on the dash board may be used to
all conditions. Tests have shown front wheel skids            apply the spring brakes gradually. This is called a
from braking are not likely even on ice. Make sure            modulating valve. It is spring-loaded so you have a
the control is in the "normal" position to have               feel for the braking action. The more you move the
normal stopping power.                                        control lever, the harder the spring brakes come
                                                              on. They work this way so you can control the
Many vehicles have automatic front wheel limiting             spring brakes if the service brakes fail. When
valves. They reduce the air to the front brakes
except when the brakes are put on very hard (60                                                                                      Page 5-3

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

parking a vehicle with a modulating control valve,            5.1.16 ­ Antilock Braking Systems (ABS)
move the lever as far as it will go and hold it in
place with the locking device.                                Truck tractors with air brakes built on or after
                                                              March 1, 1997, and other air brakes vehicles,
Dual Parking Control Valves. When main air                    (trucks, buses, trailers, and converter dollies) built
pressure is lost, the spring brakes come on. Some             on or after March 1, 1998, are required to be
vehicles, such as buses, have a separate air tank             equipped with antilock brakes. Many commercial
which can be used to release the spring brakes.               vehicles built before these dates have been
This is so you can move the vehicle in an                     voluntarily equipped with ABS. Check the
emergency. One of the valves is a push-pull type              certification label for the date of manufacture to
and is used to put on the spring brakes for parking.          determine if your vehicle is equipped with ABS.
The other valve is spring loaded in the "out"                 ABS is a computerized system that keeps your
position. When you push the control in, air from the          wheels from locking up during hard brake
separate air tank releases the spring brakes so you           applications.
can move. When you release the button, the spring
brakes come on again. There is only enough air in             Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps
the separate tank to do this a few times. Therefore,          to tell you if something isn't working.
plan carefully when moving. Otherwise, you may
be stopped in a dangerous location when the                   Tractors, trucks, and buses will have yellow ABS
separate air supply runs out. See Figure 5.3.                 malfunction lamps on the instrument panel.

                                                              Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on
                                                              the left side, either on the front or rear corner.
                                                              Dollies manufactured on or after March 1, 1998 are
                                                              required to have a lamp on the left side.

                                                              On newer vehicles, the malfunction lamp comes on
                                                              at start-up for a bulb check, and then goes out
                                                              quickly. On older systems, the lamp could stay on
                                                              until you are driving over five mph.

                                                              If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes
                                                              on once you are under way, you may have lost
                                                              ABS control at one or more wheels.

                                                              In the case of towed units manufactured before it
                                                              was required by the Department of Transportation,
                                                              it may be difficult to tell if the unit is equipped with
                                                              ABS. Look under the vehicle for the electronic
                                                              control unit (ECU) and wheel speed sensor wires
                                                              coming from the back of the brakes.

                                                              ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does
                                                              not decrease or increase your normal braking
                                                              capability. ABS only activates when wheels are
                                                              about to lock up.

                                                              ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping
                                                              distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle
                                                              under control during hard braking

                        Figure 5.3

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes                                        Page 5-4
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                    Figure 5.4

        .Subsection 5.1                                       is one). The first system is called the "primary"
    Test Your Knowledge                                       system. The other is called the "secondary"
                                                              system. See Figure 5.4.
1.  Why must air tanks be drained?
                                                              Before driving a vehicle with a dual air system,
2.  What is a supply pressure gauge used for?                 allow time for the air compressor to build up a
                                                              minimum of 100 psi pressure in both the primary
3.  All vehicles with air brakes must have a                  and secondary systems. Watch the primary and
                                                              secondary air pressure gauges (or needles, if the
    low air pressure warning signal. True or                  system has two needles in one gauge). Pay
                                                              attention to the low air pressure warning light and
    False?                                                    buzzer. The warning light and buzzer should shut
                                                              off when air pressure in both systems rises to a
4.  What are spring brakes?                                   value set by the manufacturer. This value must be
                                                              greater than 60 psi.
5.  Front wheel brakes are good under all
                                                              The warning light and buzzer should come on
    conditions. True or False?                                before the air pressure drops below 60 psi in either
                                                              system. If this happens while driving, you should
6.  How do you know if your vehicle is                        stop right away and safely park the vehicle. If one
                                                              air system is very low on pressure, either the front
    equipped with antilock brakes?                            or the rear brakes will not be operating fully. This
                                                              means it will take you longer to stop. Bring the
These questions may be on your test. If you can't             vehicle to a safe stop, and have the air brakes
answer them all, re-read subsection 5.1.                      system fixed.

5.2 ­ Dual Air Brake                                                                                                                 Page 5-5

Most heavy-duty vehicles use dual air brake
systems for safety. A dual air brake system has
two separate air brake systems, which use a single
set of brake controls. Each system has its own air
tanks, hoses, lines, etc. One system typically
operates the regular brakes on the rear axle or
axles. The other system operates the regular
brakes on the front axle (and possibly one rear
axle). Both systems supply air to the trailer (if there

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

5.3 ­ Inspecting Air Brake Systems                            to have the problem corrected. The manual
                                                              adjustment of automatic slack adjusters is
You should use the basic seven-step inspection                dangerous because it may give the driver a false
procedure described in Section 2 to inspect your              sense of security regarding the effectiveness of the
vehicle. There are more things to inspect on a                braking system.
vehicle with air brakes than one without them.
These things are discussed below, in the order                The manual adjustment of an automatic adjuster
they fit into the seven-step method.                          should only be used as a temporary measure to
                                                              correct the adjustment in an emergency situation
5.3.1 ­ During Step 2 Engine Compartment                      as it is likely the brake will soon be back out of
Checks                                                        adjustment since this procedure usually does not
                                                              fix the underlying adjustment problem.
Check Air Compressor Drive Belt (if compressor is
belt-driven). If the air compressor is belt-driven,           (Note: Automatic slack adjusters are made by
check the condition and tightness of the belt. It             different manufacturers and do not all operate the
should be in good condition.                                  same. Therefore, the specific manufacturer's
                                                              Service Manual should be consulted prior to
5.3.2 ­ During Step 5 Walk-around Inspection                  troubleshooting a brake adjustment problem.)

Check Slack Adjusters on S-cam Brakes. Park on                Check Brake Drums (or Discs), Linings, and
level ground and chock the wheels to prevent the              Hoses. Brake drums (or discs) must not have
vehicle from moving. Release the parking brakes               cracks longer than one half the width of the friction
so you can move the slack adjusters. Use gloves               area. Linings (friction material) must not be loose
and pull hard on each slack adjuster that you can             or soaked with oil or grease. They must not be
reach. If a slack adjuster moves more than about              dangerously thin. Mechanical parts must be in
one inch where the push rod attaches to it, it                place, not broken or missing. Check the air hoses
probably needs adjustment. Adjust it or have it               connected to the brake chambers to make sure
adjusted. Vehicles with too much brake slack can              they aren't cut or worn due to rubbing.
be very hard to stop. Out-of-adjustment brakes are
the most common problem found in roadside                     5.3.3 ­ Step 7 Final Air Brake Check
inspections. Be safe. Check the slack adjusters.
                                                              Do the following checks instead of the hydraulic
All vehicles built since 1994 have automatic slack            brake check shown in Section 2, Step 7: Check
adjustors. Even though automatic slack adjustors              Brake System.
adjust themselves during full brake applications,
they must be checked.                                         Check Air Compressor Governor Cut-in and
                                                              Cut-out Pressures. Pumping by the air
Automatic adjusters should not have to be                     compressor should start at about 100 psi and stop
manually adjusted except when performing                      at about 125 psi. (Check manufacturer's
maintenance on the brakes and during installation             specifications.) Run the engine at a fast idle. The
of the slack adjusters. In a vehicle equipped with            air governor should cut-out the air compressor at
automatic adjusters, when the pushrod stroke                  about the manufacturer's specified pressure. The
exceeds the legal brake adjustment limit, it is an            air pressure shown by your gauge(s) will stop
indication that a mechanical problem exists in the            rising. With the engine idling, step on and off the
adjuster itself, a problem with the related                   brake to reduce the air tank pressure. The
foundation brake components, or that the adjuster             compressor should cut-in at about the
was improperly installed.                                     manufacturer's specified cut-in pressure. The
                                                              pressure should begin to rise.
The manual adjustment of an automatic adjuster to
bring a brake pushrod stroke within legal limits is           If the air governor does not work as described
generally masking a mechanical problem and is                 above, it may need to be fixed. A governor that
not fixing it. Further, routine adjustment of most            does not work properly may not keep enough air
automatic adjusters will likely result in premature           pressure for safe driving.
wear of the adjuster itself. It is recommended that
when brakes equipped with automatic adjusters                 Test Air Leakage Rate. With a fully-charged air
are found to be out of adjustment, the driver take            system (typically 125 psi), turn off the engine,
the vehicle to a repair facility as soon as possible          release the parking brake (push in); and time the
                                                              air pressure drop. The loss rate should be less
Section 5 ­ Air Brakes                                        than two psi in one minute for single vehicles and
Version: July 2017                                            less than three psi in one minute for combination
                                                              vehicles.

                                                                                                                                     Page 5-6
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

With the air pressure built up to governor cutoff             pressure by stepping on and off the brake pedal to
(120 ­ 140 psi), shut off the engine, chock your              reduce tank pressure. The tractor protection valve
wheels (if necessary), release the parking brake              and parking brake valve should close (pop out) on
(all vehicles), and the tractor protection valve              a tractor-trailer combination vehicle and the
(combination vehicle); and fully apply the foot               parking brake valve should close (pop out) on
brake. Hold the foot brake for one minute. Check              other combination and single vehicle types when
the air gauge to see if the air pressure drops more           the air pressure falls to the manufacturer's
than three pounds in one minute (single vehicle) or           specification (20 ­ 45 psi). This will cause the
four pounds in one minute (combination vehicle). If           spring brakes to come on.
the air pressure falls more than three psi in one
minute for single vehicles (more than four psi for            Check Rate of Air Pressure Buildup. When the
combination vehicles), the air loss rate is too much.         engine is at operating rpms, the pressure should
Check for air leaks and fix before driving the                build from 85 to 100 psi within 45 seconds in dual
vehicle. Otherwise, you could lose your brakes                air systems. (If the vehicle has larger than
while driving.                                                minimum air tanks, the buildup time can be longer
                                                              and still be safe. Check the manufacturer's
Test Low Pressure Warning Signal. Shut the                    specifications.) In single air systems (pre-1975),
engine off when you have enough air pressure so               typical requirements are pressure build-up from 50
that the low pressure warning signal is not on. Turn          to 90 psi within 3 minutes with the engine at an idle
the electrical power on and step on and off the               speed of 600-900 rpms.
brake pedal to reduce air tank pressure. The low
air pressure warning signal must come on before               If air pressure does not build up fast enough, your
the pressure drops to less than 60 psi in the air             pressure may drop too low during driving, requiring
tank (or tank with the lowest air pressure, in dual           an emergency stop. Don't drive until you get the
air systems). See Figure 5.5.                                 problem fixed.

If the warning signal doesn't work, you could lose            Test Parking Brake. Stop the vehicle, put the
air pressure and you would not know it. This could            parking brake on, and gently pull against it in a low
cause sudden emergency braking in a single-                   gear to test that the parking brake will hold.
circuit air system. In dual systems the stopping
distance will be increased. Only limited braking can          Test Service Brakes. Wait for normal air pressure,
be done before the spring brakes come on.                     release the parking brake, move the vehicle
                                                              forward slowly (about five mph), and apply the
                                                              brakes firmly using the brake pedal. Note any
                                                              vehicle "pulling" to one side, unusual feel, or
                                                              delayed stopping action.

                                                              This test may show you problems, which you
                                                              otherwise wouldn't know about until you needed
                                                              the brakes on the road.

                           Figure 5.5                                    Subsections 5.2 and 5.3
                                                                           Test Your Knowledge
Check That Spring Brakes Come On
Automatically. Continue to fan off the air                    1. What is a dual air brake system?
                                                              2. What are the slack adjusters?
Section 5 ­ Air Brakes                                        3. How can you check slack adjusters?
Version: July 2017                                            4. How can you test the low pressure warning

                                                                   signal?
                                                              5. How can you check that the spring brakes

                                                                   come on automatically?
                                                              6. What are the maximum leakage rates?

                                                              These questions may be on your test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read subsections 5.2 and 5.3.

                                                                                                                                     Page 5-7
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

5.4 ­ Using Air Brakes                                        Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still
                                                              have regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the
5.4.1 ­ Normal Stops                                          system serviced soon.

Push the brake pedal down. Control the pressure               5.4.3 ­ Emergency Stops
so the vehicle comes to a smooth, safe stop. If you
have a manual transmission, don't push the clutch             If somebody suddenly pulls out in front of you, your
in until the engine rpm is down close to idle. When           natural response is to hit the brakes. This is a good
stopped, select a starting gear.                              response if there's enough distance to stop, and
                                                              you use the brakes correctly.
5.4.2 ­ Braking with Antilock Brakes
                                                              You should brake in a way that will keep your
When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a                 vehicle in a straight line and allow you to turn if it
vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up.                 becomes necessary. You can use the "controlled
When your steering wheels lock up, you lose                   braking" method or the "stab braking" method.
steering control. When your other wheels lock up,
you may skid, jackknife, or even spin the vehicle.            Controlled Braking. With this method, you apply
                                                              the brakes as hard as you can without locking the
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up. The computer               wheels. Keep steering wheel movements very
senses impending lock up, reduces the braking                 small while doing this. If you need to make a larger
pressure to a safe level, and you maintain control.           steering adjustment or if the wheels lock, release
You may or may not be able to stop faster with                the brakes. Re-apply the brakes as soon as you
ABS, but you should be able to steer around an                can.
obstacle while braking, and avoid skids caused by
over braking.                                                 Stab Braking. Apply your brakes all the way.
                                                              Release brakes when wheels lock up. As soon as
Having ABS on only the tractor, only the trailer, or          the wheels start rolling, apply the brakes fully
even on only one axle, still gives you more control           again. (It can take up to one second for the wheels
over the vehicle during braking. Brake normally.              to start rolling after you release the brakes. If you
                                                              re-apply the brakes before the wheels start rolling,
When only the tractor has ABS, you should be able             the vehicle won't straighten out.)
to maintain steering control, and there is less
chance of jackknifing. But, keep your eye on the              5.4.4 ­ Stopping Distance
trailer and let up on the brakes (if you can safely do
so) if it begins to swing out.                                Stopping distance was described in Section 2
                                                              under "Speed and Stopping Distance." With air
When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less            brakes there is an added delay - "Brake Lag". This
likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control         is the time required for the brakes to work after the
or start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if        brake pedal is pushed. With hydraulic brakes (used
you can safely do so) until you gain control.                 on cars and light/medium trucks), the brakes work
                                                              instantly. However, with air brakes, it takes a little
When you drive a tractor-trailer combination with             time (one half second or more) for the air to flow
ABS, you should brake as you always have. In                  through the lines to the brakes. Thus, the total
other words:                                                  stopping distance for vehicles with air brake
                                                              systems is made up of four different factors.
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely
and stay in control.                                          Perception Distance + Reaction Distance + Brake
                                                              Lag Distance + Braking Distance = Total Stopping
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you                 Distance.
have ABS on the tractor, the trailer, or both.
                                                              The air brake lag distance at 55 mph on dry
As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer            pavement adds about 32 feet. So at 55 mph for an
and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to           average driver under good traction and brake
stay in control.                                              conditions, the total stopping distance is over 450
                                                              feet. See Figure 5.6.
There is only one exception to this procedure, if
you always drive a straight truck or combination
with working ABS on all axles, in an emergency
stop, you can fully apply the brakes.

Without ABS, you still have normal brake functions.           Page 5-8
Drive and brake as you always have.

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                                              When your speed has been reduced to
                                                              approximately five mph below your "safe" speed,
                                                              release the brakes. (This application should last for
                                                              about three seconds.)

                                                              When your speed has increased to your "safe"
                                                              speed, repeat steps 1 and 2.

                                                              For example, if your "safe" speed is 40 mph, you
                                                              would not apply the brakes until your speed
                                                              reaches 40 mph. You now apply the brakes hard
                                                              enough to gradually reduce your speed to 35 mph
                                                              and then release the brakes. Repeat this as often
                                                              as necessary until you have reached the end of the
                                                              downgrade.

                           Figure 5.6                         5.4.7 ­ Low Air Pressure

5.4.5 ­ Brake Fading or Failure                               If the low air pressure warning comes on, stop and
                                                              safely park your vehicle as soon as possible. There
Brakes are designed so brake shoes or pads rub                might be an air leak in the system. Controlled
against the brake drum or disks to slow the vehicle.          braking is possible only while enough air remains
Braking creates heat, but brakes are designed to              in the air tanks. The spring brakes will come on
take a lot of heat. However, brakes can fade or fail          when the air pressure drops into the range of 20 to
from excessive heat caused by using them too                  45 psi. A heavily loaded vehicle will take a long
much and not relying on the engine braking effect.            distance to stop because the spring brakes do not
                                                              work on all axles. Lightly loaded vehicles or
Excessive use of the service brakes results in                vehicles on slippery roads may skid out of control
overheating and leads to brake fade. Brake fade               when the spring brakes come on. It is much safer
results from excessive heat causing chemical                  to stop while there is enough air in the tanks to use
changes in the brake lining, which reduce friction,           the foot brakes.
and also causing expansion of the brake drums.
As the overheated drums expand, the brake shoes               5.4.8 ­ Parking Brakes
and linings have to move farther to contact the
drums, and the force of this contact is reduced.              Any time you park, use the parking brakes, except
Continued overuse may increase brake fade until               as noted below. Pull the parking brake control
the vehicle cannot be slowed down or stopped.                 knob out to apply the parking brakes, push it in to
                                                              release. The control will be a yellow, diamond-
Brake fade is also affected by adjustment. To                 shaped knob labeled "parking brakes" on newer
safely control a vehicle, every brake must do its             vehicles. On older vehicles, it may be a round blue
share of the work. Brakes out of adjustment will              knob or some other shape (including a lever that
stop doing their share before those that are in               swings from side to side or up and down).
adjustment. The other brakes can then overheat
and fade, and there will not be enough braking                Don't use the parking brakes if the brakes are very
available to control the vehicle(s). Brakes can get           hot (from just having come down a steep grade), or
out of adjustment quickly, especially when they are           if the brakes are very wet in freezing temperatures.
hot. Therefore, check brake adjustment often.                 If they are used while they are very hot, they can
                                                              be damaged by the heat. If they are used in
5.4.6 ­ Proper Braking Technique                              freezing temperatures when the brakes are very
                                                              wet, they can freeze so the vehicle cannot move.
Remember. The use of brakes on a long and/or                  Use wheel chocks on a level surface to hold the
steep downgrade is only a supplement to the                   vehicle. Let hot brakes cool before using the
braking effect of the engine. Once the vehicle is in          parking brakes. If the brakes are wet, use the
the proper low gear, the following is the proper              brakes lightly while driving in a low gear to heat
braking technique:                                            and dry them.

Apply the brakes just hard enough to feel a definite          If your vehicle does not have automatic air tank
slowdown.                                                     drains, drain your air tanks at the end of each
                                                              working day to remove moisture and oil.
                                                              Otherwise, the brakes could fail.

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes                                        Page 5-9
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Never leave your vehicle unattended without
applying the parking brakes or chocking the
wheels. Your vehicle might roll away and cause
injury and damage.

                 Subsection 5.4
             Test Your Knowledge

1. Why should you be in the proper gear before
       starting down a hill?

2. What factors can cause brakes to fade or
       fail?

3. The use of brakes on a long, steep
       downgrade is only a supplement to the
       braking effect of the engine. True or False?

4. If you are away from your vehicle only a short
       time, you do not need to use the parking
       brake. True or False?

5. How often should you drain air tanks?
6. How should you brake when you drive a

       tractor-trailer combination with ABS?
7. You still have normal brake functions if your

       ABS is not working. True or False?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsection 5.4.

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes                                        Page 5-10
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 6                                          Avoid quick lane changes, especially when fully
COMBINATION VEHICLES                                          loaded.

This Section Covers                                           6.1.2 ­ Steer Gently

 Driving Combinations                                         Trucks with trailers have a dangerous "crack-the-
 Combination Vehicle Air Brakes                               whip" effect. When you make a quick lane change,
 Antilock Brake Systems                                       the crack-the-whip effect can turn the trailer over.
 Coupling and Uncoupling                                      There are many accidents where only the trailer
 Inspecting Combinations                                      has overturned.

This section provides information needed to pass              "Rearward amplification" causes the crack-the-
the tests for combination vehicles (tractor-trailer,          whip effect. Figure 6.1 shows eight types of
doubles, triples, straight truck with trailer). The           combination vehicles and the rearward
information is only to give you the minimum                   amplification each has in a quick lane change.
knowledge needed for driving common                           Rigs with the least crack-the-whip effect are shown
combination vehicles. You should also study                   at the top and those with the most, at the bottom.
Section 7 if you need to pass the test for doubles            Rearward amplification of 2.0 in the chart means
and triples.                                                  that the rear trailer is twice as likely to turn over as
                                                              the tractor. You can see that triples have a
6.1 ­ Driving Combination Vehicles                            rearward amplification of 3.5. This means you can
Safely                                                        roll the last trailer of triples 3.5 times as easily as a
                                                              five-axle tractor.
Combination vehicles are usually heavier, longer,
and require more driving skill than single                    Steer gently and smoothly when you are pulling
commercial vehicles. This means that drivers of               trailers. If you make a sudden movement with your
combination vehicles need more knowledge and                  steering wheel, your trailer could tip over. Follow
skill than drivers of single vehicles. In this section,       far enough behind other vehicles (at least 1
we talk about some important safety factors that              second for each 10 feet of your vehicle length, plus
apply specifically to combination vehicles.                   another second if going over 40 mph). Look far
                                                              enough down the road to avoid being surprised
6.1.1 ­ Rollover Risks                                        and having to make a sudden lane change. At
                                                              night, drive slowly enough to see obstacles with
More than half of truck driver deaths in crashes are          your headlights before it is too late to change lanes
the result of truck rollovers. When more cargo is             or stop gently. Slow down to a safe speed before
piled up in a truck, the "center of gravity" moves            going into a turn.
higher up from the road. The truck becomes easier
to turn over. Fully loaded rigs are ten times more            6.1.3 ­ Brake Early
likely to roll over in a crash than empty rigs.
                                                              Control your speed whether fully loaded or empty.
The following two things will help you prevent                Large combination vehicles take longer to stop
rollover--keep the cargo as close to the ground as            when they are empty than when they are fully
possible, and drive slowly around turns. Keeping              loaded. When lightly loaded, the very stiff
cargo low is even more important in combination               suspension springs and strong brakes give poor
vehicles than in straight trucks. Also, keep the load         traction and make it very easy to lock up the
centered on your rig. If the load is to one side so it        wheels. Your trailer can swing out and strike other
makes a trailer lean, a rollover is more likely. Make         vehicles. Your tractor can jackknife very quickly.
sure your cargo is centered and spread out as                 You also must be very careful about driving
much as possible. (Cargo distribution is covered in           "bobtail" tractors (tractors without semitrailers).
Section 3 of this manual.)                                    Tests have shown that bobtails can be very hard to
                                                              stop smoothly. It takes them longer to stop than a
Rollovers happen when you turn too fast. Drive                tractor-semitrailer loaded to maximum gross
slowly around corners, on ramps, and off ramps.               weight.

                                                              In any combination rig, allow lots of following
                                                              distance and look far ahead, so you can brake
                                                              early. Don't be caught by surprise and have to
                                                              make a "panic" stop.

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-1
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                  Figure 6.1

6.1.4 ­ Railroad-highway Crossings                            6.1.5 ­ Prevent Trailer Skids

Railroad-highway crossings can also cause                     When the wheels of a trailer lock up, the trailer will
problems, particularly when pulling trailers with low         tend to swing around. This is more likely to happen
underneath clearance.                                         when the trailer is empty or lightly loaded. This
                                                              type of jackknife is often called a "trailer jackknife."
These trailers can get stuck on raised crossings:             See Figure 6.2.

Low slung units (lowboy, car carrier, moving van,             The procedure for stopping a trailer skid is:
possum-belly livestock trailer).
                                                              Recognize the Skid. The earliest and best way to
Single-axle tractor pulling a long trailer with its           recognize that the trailer has started to skid is by
landing gear set to accommodate a tandem-axle                 seeing it in your mirrors. Any time you apply the
tractor.                                                      brakes hard, check the mirrors to make sure the
                                                              trailer is staying where it should be. Once the
If for any reason you get stuck on the tracks, get            trailer swings out of your lane, it's very difficult to
out of the vehicle and away from the tracks. Check            prevent a jackknife.
signposts or signal housing at the crossing for
emergency notification information. Call 911 or               * (From R.D. Ervin, R.L. Nisconger, C.C.
other emergency number. Give the location of the              MacAdam, and P.S. Fancher, "Influence of size
crossing using all identifiable landmarks, especially         and weight variables on the stability and control
the DOT number, if posted.                                    properties of heavy trucks, "University of Michigan
                                                              Transportation Research Institute, 1983).

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-2
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                                                               starting the turn because it will keep other drivers
                                                                               from passing you on the right. See Figure 6.4.

                                                         Figure 6.3

                           Figure 6.2                                               Figure 6.4

Stop Using the Brake. Release the brakes to get          6.1.7 ­ Backing with a Trailer.
traction back. Do not use the trailer hand brake (if     Backing with a Trailer. When backing a car,
you have one) to "straighten out the rig." This is the   straight truck, or bus, you turn the top of the
wrong thing to do since the brakes on the trailer        steering wheel in the direction you want to go.
wheels caused the skid in the first place. Once the      When backing a trailer, you turn the steering wheel
trailer wheels grip the road again, the trailer will     in the opposite direction. Once the trailer starts to
start to follow the tractor and straighten out.          turn, you must turn the wheel the other way to
                                                         follow the trailer.
6.1.6 ­ Turn Wide                                        Whenever you back up with a trailer, try to position
                                                         your vehicle so you can back in a straight line. If
When a vehicle goes around a corner, the rear            you must back on a curved path, back to the
wheels follow a different path than the front            driver's side so you can see. See Figure 6.5.
wheels. This is called off-tracking or "cheating."
Figure 6.3 shows how off-tracking causes the path                                                                               Page 6-3
followed by a tractor to be wider than the rig itself.
Longer vehicles will off-track more. The rear
wheels of the powered unit (truck or tractor) will off-
track some, and the rear wheels of the trailer will
off-track even more. If there is more than one
trailer, the rear wheels of the last trailer will off-
track the most. Steer the front end wide enough
around a corner so the rear end does not run over
the curb, pedestrians, etc. However, keep the rear
of your vehicle close to the curb. This w ill stop
other drivers from passing you on the right. If you
cannot complete your turn without entering another
traffic lane, turn wide as you complete the turn.
This is better than swinging wide to the left before

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                                                      Subsection 6.1
                                                                  Test Your Knowledge

                                                              1.  What two things are important to prevent

                                                                  rollover?

                                                              2.  When you turn suddenly while pulling

                                                                  doubles, which trailer is most likely to turn

                                                                  over?

                                                              3.  Why should you not use the trailer hand

                                                                  brake to straighten out a jackknifing trailer?

                                                              4.  What is off-tracking?

                                                              5.  When you back a trailer, you should

                                                                  position your vehicle so you can back in a

                                                                  curved path to the driver's side. True or

                                                                  False?

                                                              6.  What type of trailers can get stuck on

                                                                  railroad-highway crossings?

                                                              These questions may be on your test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read subsection 6.1.

                           Figure 6.5                         6.2 ­ Combination Vehicle Air Brakes

Look at Your Path. Look at your line of travel                You should study Section 5: Air Brakes before
before you begin. Get out and walk around the                 reading this. In combination vehicles the braking
vehicle. Check your clearance to the sides and                system has parts to control the trailer brakes, in
overhead, in and near the path your vehicle.                  addition to the parts described in Section 5. These
                                                              parts are described below.
Use Mirrors on Both Sides. Check the outside
mirrors on both sides frequently. Get out of the              6.2.1 ­ Trailer Hand Valve
vehicle and re-inspect your path if you are unsure.
                                                              The trailer hand valve (also called the trolley valve
Back Slowly. This will let you make corrections               or Johnson bar) works the trailer brakes. The trailer
before you get too far off course.                            hand valve should be used only to test the trailer
                                                              brakes. Do not use it in driving because of the
Correct Drift Immediately. As soon as you see                 danger of making the trailer skid. The foot brake
the trailer getting off the proper path, correct it by        sends air to all of the brakes on the vehicle
turning the top of the steering wheel in the                  (including the trailer(s)). There is much less danger
direction of the drift.                                       of causing a skid or jackknife when using just the
                                                              foot brake.
Pull Forward. When backing a trailer, make pull-
ups to re-position your vehicle as needed.                    Never use the hand valve for parking because all
                                                              the air might leak out unlocking the brakes (in
                                                              trailers that don't have spring brakes). Always use
                                                              the parking brakes when parking. If the trailer does
                                                              not have spring brakes, use wheel chocks to keep
                                                              the trailer from moving.

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                                                               Page 6-4
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

6.2.2 ­ Tractor Protection Valve                              apart the emergency air hose. Or it could be
                                                              caused by a hose, metal tubing, or other part
The tractor protection valve keeps air in the tractor         breaking, letting the air out. When the emergency
or truck brake system should the trailer break away           line loses pressure, it also causes the tractor
or develop a bad leak. The tractor protection valve           protection valve to close (the air supply knob will
is controlled by the "trailer air supply" control valve       pop out).
in the cab. The control valve allows you to open
and shut the tractor protection valve. The tractor            Emergency lines are often coded with the color red
protection valve will close automatically if air              (red hose, red couplers, or other parts) to keep
pressure is low (in the range of 20 to 45 psi). When          from getting them mixed up with the blue service
the tractor protection valve closes, it stops any air         line.
from going out of the tractor. It also lets the air out
of the trailer emergency line. This causes the trailer        6.2.5 ­ Hose Couplers (Glad Hands)
emergency brakes to come on, with possible loss
of control. (Emergency brakes are covered later.)             Glad hands are coupling devices used to connect
                                                              the service and emergency air-lines from the truck
6.2.3 ­ Trailer Air Supply Control                            or tractor to the trailer. The couplers have a rubber
                                                              seal, which prevents air from escaping. Clean the
The trailer air supply control on newer vehicles is a         couplers and rubber seals before a connection is
red eight-sided knob, which you use to control the            made. When connecting the glad hands, press the
tractor protection valve. You push it in to supply the        two seals together with the couplers at a 90 degree
trailer with air, and pull it out to shut the air off and     angle to each other. A turn of the glad hand
put on the trailer emergency brakes. The valve will           attached to the hose will join and lock the couplers.
pop out (thus closing the tractor protection valve)
when the air pressure drops into the range of 20 to           When coupling, make sure to couple the proper
45 psi. Tractor protection valve controls or                  glad hands together. To help avoid mistakes,
"emergency" valves on older vehicles may not                  colors are sometimes used. Blue is used for the
operate automatically. There may be a lever rather            service lines and red for the emergency (supply)
than a knob. The "normal" position is used for                lines. Sometimes, metal tags are attached to the
pulling a trailer. The "emergency" position is used           lines with the words "service" and "emergency"
to shut the air off and put on the trailer emergency          stamped on them. See Figure 6.6
brakes.

6.2.4 ­ Trailer Air-lines

Every combination vehicle has two air-lines, the
service line and the emergency line. They run
between each vehicle (tractor to trailer, trailer to
dolly, dolly to second trailer, etc.)

Service Air-line. The service line (also called the
control line or signal line) carries air, which is
controlled by the foot brake or the trailer hand
brake. Depending on how hard you press the foot
brake or hand valve, the pressure in the service
line will similarly change. The service line is
connected to relay valves. These valves allow the
trailer brakes to be applied more quickly than
would otherwise be possible.

Emergency Air-line. The emergency line (also                  Figure 6.6
called the supply line) has two purposes. First, it
supplies air to the trailer air tanks. Second, the                        Page 6-5
emergency line controls the emergency brakes on
combination vehicles. Loss of air pressure in the
emergency line causes the trailer emergency
brakes to come on. The pressure loss could be
caused by a trailer breaking loose, thus tearing

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

If you do cross the air-lines, supply air will be sent        valves are in the open position except the ones at
to the service line instead of going to charge the            the back of the last trailer, which must be closed.
trailer air tanks. Air will not be available to release
the trailer spring brakes (parking brakes). If the            6.2.8 ­ Trailer Service, Parking and Emergency
spring brakes don't release when you push the                 Brakes
trailer air supply control, check the air-line
connections.                                                  Newer trailers have spring brakes just like trucks
                                                              and truck tractors. However, converter dollies and
Older trailers do not have spring brakes. If the air          trailers built before 1975 are not required to have
supply in the trailer air tank has leaked away there          spring brakes. Those that do not have spring
will be no emergency brakes, and the trailer                  brakes have emergency brakes, which work from
wheels will turn freely. If you crossed the air-lines,        the air stored in the trailer air tank. The emergency
you could drive away but you wouldn't have trailer            brakes come on whenever air pressure in the
brakes. This would be very dangerous. Always test             emergency line is lost. These trailers have no
the trailer brakes before driving with the hand valve         parking brake. The emergency brakes come on
or by pulling the air supply (tractor protection valve)       whenever the air supply knob is pulled out or the
control. Pull gently against them in a low gear to            trailer is disconnected. A major leak in the
make sure the brakes work.                                    emergency line will cause the tractor protection
                                                              valve to close and the trailer emergency brakes to
Some vehicles have "dead end" or dummy                        come on. But the brakes will hold only as long as
couplers to which the hoses may be attached                   there is air pressure in the trailer air tank.
when they are not in use. This will prevent water             Eventually, the air will leak away and then there
and dirt from getting into the coupler and the air-           will be no brakes. Therefore, it is very important for
lines. Use the dummy couplers when the air-lines              safety that you use wheel chocks when you park
are not connected to a trailer. If there are no               trailers without spring brakes.
dummy couplers, the glad hands can sometimes
be locked together (depending on the couplings). It           You may not notice a major leak in the service line
is very important to keep the air supply clean.               until you try to put the brakes on. Then, the air loss
                                                              from the leak will lower the air tank pressure
6.2.6 ­ Trailer Air Tanks                                     quickly. If it goes low enough, the trailer
                                                              emergency brakes will come on.

Each trailer and converter dolly has one or more                      Subsection 6.2
air tanks. They are filled by the emergency (supply)              Test Your Knowledge
line from the tractor. They provide the air pressure
used to operate trailer brakes. Air pressure is sent          1.  Why should you not use the trailer hand
from the air tanks to the brakes by relay valves.
                                                                  valve while driving?
The pressure in the service line tells how much
pressure the relay valves should send to the trailer          2.  Describe what the trailer air supply control
brakes. The pressure in the service line is
controlled by the brake pedal (and the trailer hand               does.
brake).
                                                              3.  Describe what the service line is for.
It is important that you don't let water and oil build
up in the air tanks. If you do, the brakes may not            4.  What is the emergency air-line for?
work correctly. Each tank has a drain valve on it
and you should drain each tank every day. If your             5.  Why should you use chocks when parking
tanks have automatic drains, they will keep most
moisture out. But you should still open the drains to             a trailer without spring brakes?
make sure.
                                                              6.  Where are shut-off valves?

                                                              These questions may be on your test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read subsection 6.2.

6.2.7 ­ Shut-off Valves

Shut-off valves (also called cut-out cocks) are used
in the service and supply air-lines at the back of
trailers used to tow other trailers. These valves
permit closing the air-lines off when another trailer
is not being towed. You must check that all shut-off

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                                                                    Page 6-6
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

6.3 ­ Antilock Brake Systems                                  ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up. The computer
                                                              senses impending lockup, reduces the braking
6.3.1 ­ Trailers Required to Have ABS                         pressure to a safe level, and you maintain control.

All trailers and converter dollies built on or after          Having ABS on only the trailer, or even on only
March 1, 1998, are required to have ABS.                      one axle, still gives you more control over the
However, many trailers and converter dollies built            vehicle during braking.
before this date have been voluntarily equipped
with ABS.                                                     When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less
                                                              likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control
Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on            or start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if
the left side, either on the front or rear corner. See        you can safely do so) until you gain control.
Figure 6.7. Dollies manufactured on or after March
1, 1998, are required to have a lamp on the left              When you drive a tractor-trailer combination with
side.                                                         ABS, you should brake as you always have. In
                                                              other words:
In the case of vehicles manufactured before the
required date, it may be difficult to tell if the unit is     Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely
equipped with ABS. Look under the vehicle for the             and stay in control.
ECU and wheel speed sensor wires coming from
the back of the brakes.                                       Brake the same way, regardless of whether you
                                                              have ABS on the tractor, the trailer, or both.

                                                              As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer
                                                              and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to
                                                              stay in control.

                                                              Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still
                                                              have regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the
                                                              system serviced soon.

                                                              ABS won't allow you to drive faster, follow more
                                                              closely, or drive less carefully.

                           Figure 6.7                         6.4 ­ Coupling and Uncoupling

6.3.2 ­ Braking with ABS                                      Knowing how to couple and uncouple correctly is
                                                              basic to safe operation of combination vehicles.
ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does             Wrong coupling and uncoupling can be very
not decrease or increase your normal braking                  dangerous. General coupling and uncoupling steps
capability. ABS only activates when wheels are                are listed below. There are differences between
about to lock up.                                             different rigs, so learn the details of coupling and
                                                              uncoupling the truck(s) you will operate.
ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping
distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle               6.4.1 ­ Coupling Tractor-Semitrailers
under control during hard braking.
                                                              Step 1. Inspect Fifth Wheel
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles
Version: July 2017                                            Check for damaged/missing parts.

                                                              Check to see that mounting to tractor is secure, no
                                                              cracks in frame, etc.

                                                              Be sure that the fifth wheel plate is greased as
                                                              required. Failure to keep the fifth wheel plate
                                                              lubricated could cause steering problems because
                                                              of friction between the tractor and trailer.

                                                              Check if fifth wheel is in proper position for
                                                              coupling:

                                                              Wheel tilted down toward rear of tractor.

                                                                                                                                     Page 6-7
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Jaws open.                                                    Step 8. Supply Air to Trailer

Safety unlocking handle in the automatic lock                 From cab, push in "air supply" knob or move
position.                                                     tractor protection valve control from the
                                                              "emergency" to the "normal" position to supply air
If you have a sliding fifth wheel, make sure it is            to the trailer brake system.
locked.
                                                              Wait until the air pressure is normal.
Make sure the trailer kingpin is not bent or broken.
                                                              Check brake system for crossed air-lines.
Step 2. Inspect Area and Chock Wheels                         Shut engine off so you can hear the brakes.
                                                              Apply and release trailer brakes and listen for
Make sure area around the vehicle is clear.                   sound of trailer brakes being applied and released.
                                                              You should hear the brakes move when applied
Be sure trailer wheels are chocked or spring                  and air escape when the brakes are released.
brakes are on.
                                                              Check air brake system pressure gauge for signs
Check that cargo (if any) is secured against                  of major air loss.
movement due to tractor being coupled to the
trailer.                                                      When you are sure trailer brakes are working, start
                                                              engine.
Step 3. Position Tractor
                                                              Make sure air pressure is up to normal.
Put the tractor directly in front of the trailer. (Never
back under the trailer at an angle because you                Step 9. Lock Trailer Brakes
might push the trailer sideways and break the
landing gear.)                                                Pull out the "air supply" knob or move the tractor
                                                              protection valve control from "normal" to
Check position, using outside mirrors, by looking             "emergency."
down both sides of the trailer.
                                                              Step 10. Back Under Trailer
Step 4. Back Slowly
                                                              Use lowest reverse gear.
Back until fifth wheel just touches the trailer.
                                                              Back tractor slowly under trailer to avoid hitting the
Don't hit the trailer.                                        kingpin too hard.

Step 5. Secure Tractor                                        Stop when the kingpin is locked into the fifth wheel.

Put on the parking brake.                                     Step 11. Check Connection for Security

Put transmission in neutral.                                  Raise trailer landing gear slightly off ground.

Step 6. Check Trailer Height                                  Pull tractor gently forward while the trailer brakes
                                                              are still locked to check that the trailer is locked
The trailer should be low enough that it is raised            onto the tractor.
slightly by the tractor when the tractor is backed
under it. Raise or lower the trailer as needed. (If           Step 12. Secure Vehicle
the trailer is too low, the tractor may strike and
damage the trailer nose; if the trailer is too high, it       Put transmission in neutral.
may not couple correctly.)
                                                              Put parking brakes on.
Check that the kingpin and fifth wheel are aligned.
                                                              Shut off engine and take key with you so someone
Step 7. Connect Air-lines to Trailer                          else won't move truck while you are under it.

Check glad hand seals and connect tractor                     Step 13. Inspect Coupling
emergency air-line to trailer emergency glad hand.
                                                              Use a flashlight, if necessary.
Check glad hand seals and connect tractor service
air-line to trailer service glad hand.                        Make sure there is no space between upper and
                                                              lower fifth wheel. If there is space, something is
Make sure air-lines are safely supported where                wrong (kingpin may be on top of the closed fifth
they won't be crushed or caught while tractor is              wheel jaws, and trailer would come loose very
backing under the trailer.                                    easily).

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-8
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Go under trailer and look into the back of the fifth          Step 2. Ease Pressure on Locking Jaws
wheel. Make sure the fifth wheel jaws have closed
around the shank of the kingpin.                              Shut off trailer air supply to lock trailer brakes.

Check that the locking lever is in the "lock"                 Ease pressure on fifth wheel locking jaws by
position.                                                     backing up gently. (This will help you release the
                                                              fifth wheel locking lever.)
Check that the safety latch is in position over
locking lever. (On some fifth wheels the catch must           Put parking brakes on while tractor is pushing
be put in place by hand.)                                     against the kingpin. (This will hold rig with pressure
                                                              off the locking jaws.)
If the coupling isn't right, don't drive the coupled
unit; get it fixed.                                           Step 3. Chock Trailer Wheels

Step 14. Connect the Electrical Cord and Check                Chock the trailer wheels if the trailer doesn't have
Air-lines                                                     spring brakes or if you're not sure. (The air could
                                                              leak out of the trailer air tank, releasing its
Plug the electrical cord into the trailer and fasten          emergency brakes. Without chocks, the trailer
the safety catch.                                             could move.)

Check both air-lines and electrical line for signs of         Step 4. Lower the Landing Gear
damage.
                                                              If trailer is empty, lower the landing gear until it
Make sure air and electrical lines will not hit any           makes firm contact with the ground.
moving parts of vehicle.
                                                              If trailer is loaded, after the landing gear makes
Step 15. Raise Front Trailer Supports (Landing                firm contact with the ground, turn crank in low gear
Gear)                                                         a few extra turns. This will lift some weight off the
                                                              tractor. (Do not lift trailer off the fifth wheel.) This
Use low gear range (if so equipped) to begin                  will:
raising the landing gear. Once free of weight,
switch to the high gear range.                                Make it easier to unlatch fifth wheel.

Raise the landing gear all the way up. (Never drive           Make it easier to couple next time.
with landing gear only part way up as it may catch
on railroad tracks or other things.)                          Step 5. Disconnect Air-lines and Electrical
                                                              Cable
After raising landing gear, secure the crank handle
safely.                                                       Disconnect air-lines from trailer. Connect air-line
                                                              glad hands to dummy couplers at back of cab or
When full weight of trailer is resting on tractor:            couple them together.

Check for enough clearance between rear of                    Hang electrical cable with plug down to prevent
tractor frame and landing gear. (When tractor turns           moisture from entering it.
sharply, it must not hit landing gear.)
                                                              Make sure lines are supported so they won't be
Check that there is enough clearance between the              damaged while driving the tractor.
top of the tractor tires and the nose of the trailer.
                                                              Step 6. Unlock Fifth Wheel
Step 16. Remove Trailer Wheel Chocks
                                                              Raise the release handle lock.
Remove and store wheel chocks in a safe place.
                                                              Pull the release handle to "open" position.
6.4.2 ­ Uncoupling Tractor-Semitrailers
                                                              Keep legs and feet clear of the rear tractor wheels
The following steps will help you to uncouple                 to avoid serious injury in case the vehicle moves.
safely.
                                                              Step 7. Pull Tractor Partially Clear of Trailer
Step 1. Position Rig
                                                              Pull tractor forward until fifth wheel comes out from
Make sure surface of parking area can support                 under the trailer.
weight of trailer.
                                                              Stop with tractor frame under trailer (prevents
Have tractor lined up with the trailer. (Pulling out at       trailer from falling to ground if landing gear should
an angle can damage landing gear.)                            collapse or sink).

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-9
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Step 8. Secure Tractor                                        Lift the lock handle away from the vehicle until the
Apply parking brake.                                          lock clears the lock seat on the hook body.
Place transmission in neutral.                                Open the latch by rotating the latch assembly up
                                                              toward the vehicle until the latch is in its most
Step 9. Inspect Trailer Supports                              upright position, then release the lock handle.
Make sure ground is supporting trailer.                       (Figure 17 and 18)
Make sure landing gear is not damaged.
                                                              .
Step 10. Pull Tractor Clear of Trailer
Release parking brakes.
Check the area and drive tractor forward until it
clears.

           Subsections 6.3 and 6.4
             Test Your Knowledge

1. What might happen if the trailer is too high
     when you try to couple?

2. After coupling, how much space should be
     between the upper and lower fifth wheel?

3. You should look into the back of the fifth wheel
     to see if it is locked onto the kingpin. True or
     False?

4. To drive you need to raise the landing gear
     only until it just lifts off the pavement. True or
     False?

5. How do you know if your trailer is equipped
     with antilock brakes?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsections 6.3 and 6.4.

6.4.3 Coupling a Pintle Hook                                  Step 3. Lower Drawbar into Place

Step 1. Inspect Pintle Hook                                   Position the drawbar eye over the horn of the pintle
                                                              hook and lower it into place.
Before operating, check for worn, damaged, or
missing parts, and make sure mount is secure.                 Step 4. Lock Pintle Hook
If the pintle hook is not secured to the mounting
surface, the pintle hook could separate from the              Push the latch closed. When correctly locked, the
vehicle which, if not avoided, could result in death          lock handle will rotate and move up until it is flush
or serious injury.                                            with the top of the latch (Figure 19).

Step 2. Unlock Lock Pin and Open Latch

Unlock and remove the tethered lock pin, if
applicable (Figure 16).

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-10
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                                                               6.4.5 - Coupling a Drawbar

Insert the tethered lock pin through the latch and    Step 1. Remove Safety Lock screw and Rotate
lock holes, and close the tethered wire lock pin, if  Safety Cover Bar
applicable (Figure 16).                               Remove safety lock screw (2), recover and keep
                                                      the relative self-locking nut (12) aside then also
Failure to correctly lock the latch can result in     loosen safety lock screw (2a) and turn out the
separation of the trailer and vehicle which, if not   adjustment screw (3) by at least five turns.
avoided, could result in death or serious injury.     Rotate the safety cover bar (4) outwards so that it
                                                      is completely open.
6.4.4 - Uncoupling a Pintle Hook
                                                      Step 2. Reverse Truck
Step 1. Park on Level Surface                         Reverse truck very slowly until the ball cup
Park the trailer on a firm level surface and block    drawbar eye (6) is in position exactly above the
trailer tires.                                        drawbar coupling ball (5).

Step 2. Disconnect Electrical Connector,              Step 3. Lower the Drawbeam
Breakaway Brake Switch and Safety Chains              Lower the drawbeam until the ball cup drawbar eye
Disconnect electrical connector.                      (6) lies completely covering the drawbar coupling
Disconnect breakaway brake switch lanyard.            ball (5).
Disconnect safety chains from tow vehicle.
                                                      Step 4. Rotate the Safety Cover Bar
Step 3. Unlock the Coupler                            Rotate the safety cover bar back inwards (4) and fit
Unlock the coupler and open it.                       in safety lock screw (2) together with its self-
                                                      locking nut.
Step 4. Check Ground Surface for Correct              Tighten in both the lock screws (2, 2a) together
Support                                               with their relative self-locking nuts (12, 12a) at a
Before extending jack, make certain the ground        350 to 400 Nm torque wrench setting.
surface below the jack pad will support the tongue
load.                                                 Step 5. Adjust the Adjustment Screw
                                                      Adjust the adjustment screw (3) until a 0.3 - 0.5
Step 5. Rotate Jack Handle                            mm vertical clearance between the guard disk (13)
Rotate jack handle to extend the jack and transfer    and the ball cup (6) is reached. Lock setting with
the weight of the trailer tongue to the jack.         counter nut (11).

Step 6. Raise Trailer Coupler
Raise the trailer coupler above the tow vehicle
hitch.

Step 7. Drive Forward
Drive tow vehicle forward.

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                                                                           Page 6-11
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                                              Rotate the safety cover bar (4) outwards so that it
                                                              is completely open.
                                                              Lift the trailer drawbeam until the drawbar coupling
                                                              ball (5) is fully visible, then travel forward with the
                                                              trailer very slowly.
                                                              Rotate the safety cover bar inwards (4) until it
                                                              lodges back in its housing.

                                                              Step 4. Lock Safety Screw and Tighten Self-
                                                              Locking Nut
                                                              Fit in safety lock screw (2) and tighten in self-
                                                              locking nut (12).

In the event that the safety cover bar (4) will not           6.4.7 - Coupling a Gooseneck Hitch
perfectly lodge into its seating appropriately, travel
is strictly forbidden.                                        If you are hooking up a Gooseneck or a fifth wheel
                                                              hitch, the procedure is a little different from a
                                                              receiver and ball, but it is not more difficult.

                                                              Step 1. Open the Latch and Lubricate the
                                                              Gooseneck Ball
                                                              Open the clamp latch on the Gooseneck coupler.
                                                              Make sure that the Gooseneck ball is properly
                                                              lubricated.

                                                              Step 2. Position Coupler and Latch the Clamp
                                                              Position the trailer's coupler directly over the ball
                                                              and lower the Gooseneck trailer into position and
                                                              latch the clamp.

Step 6. Protect Coupling Ball and Anchor Edge                 Step 3. Attach Safety Chains
onto Ball                                                     Attach your safety chains. Remember that all
Protect the part that is still visible of the coupling        trailers are required by law to have safety chains.
ball (5) with the rubber dust proof bellows
protection cover (7). Accurately anchor the edge              Step 4. Connect Trailer Light Wiring
directly onto the ball itself.                                Connect your trailer light wiring to your vehicle's
                                                              connector.
Step 7. Lubricate the Drawbar Eye                             Check all of your lights, including your brake lights.
Lubricate the inside of the drawbar eye ball cup (6)
directly through the grease nipple (18).                      Step 5. Lower and Stow the Trailer Jacks
                                                              Completely lower and stow the trailer jacks,
6.4.6 - Uncoupling a Drawbar                                  allowing the weight to settle onto the tow vehicle.

Step 1. Turn Trailer Brake On                                 6.4.8 Uncoupling a Gooseneck Hitch
Make sure that the trailer brake is on.
                                                              Step 1. Remove Safety Pin and Clip
Step 2. Remove Cover and Loosen Screws                        Simply remove safety pin and clip.
Remove the rubber dust proof bellows protection
cover (7).                                                    Step 2. Rotate Handle and Raise Trailer Off Ball
Loosen the adjustment screw (3) and the counter               Rotate handle to this position (Fig. B) and raise
nut (11).                                                     trailer off ball. Coupler will return to load position
Loosen safety lock screw (2a) and remove safety               automatically.
lock screw (2) together with its self-locking nut
(12).                                                         Step 3. Install Safety Pin and Clip
                                                              Install safety pin and clip. (Fig. B)

Step 3. Rotate Safety Cover Bar and Lift Trailer
Drawbeam

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-12
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

6.5 ­ Inspecting a Combination Vehicle                                                   Figure 6.8
                                                              Check fifth wheel (upper).
Use the seven-step inspection procedure                       Glide plate securely mounted to trailer frame.
described in Section 2 to inspect your combination            Kingpin not damaged.
vehicle. There are more things to inspect on a                Air and electric lines to trailer.
combination vehicle than on a single vehicle. (For            Electrical cord firmly plugged in and secured.
example, tires, wheels, lights, reflectors, etc.)             Air-lines properly connected to glad hands, no air
However, there are also some new things to check.             leaks, properly secured with enough slack for
These are discussed below.                                    turns.
6.5.1 ­ Additional Things to Check during a                   All lines free from damage.
Walk-around Inspection                                        Sliding fifth wheel.
Do these checks in addition to those already listed           Slide not damaged or parts missing.
in Section 2.                                                 Properly greased.
Coupling System Areas                                         All locking pins present and locked in place.
Check fifth wheel (lower).                                    If air powered--no air leaks.
Securely mounted to frame.                                    Check that fifth wheel is not so far forward that
                                                              tractor frame will hit landing gear, or the cab hit the
    No missing or damaged parts.                              trailer, during turns.
    Enough grease.
    No visible space between upper and lower fifth            Landing Gear
    wheel.                                                    Fully raised, no missing parts, not bent or
    Locking jaws around the shank, not the head of            otherwise damaged.
    kingpin. See Figure 6.8.                                  Crank handle in place and secured.
    Release arm properly seated and safety                    If power operated, no air or hydraulic leaks.
    latch/lock engaged.
                                                              6.5.2 ­ Combination Vehicle Brake Check
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Do these checks in addition to Section 5.3:
Version: July 2017                                            Inspecting Air Brake Systems.

                                                              The following section explains how to check air
                                                              brakes on combination vehicles. Check the brakes

                                                                                                                                    Page 6-13
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

on a double or triple trailer as you would any                                 Subsection 6.5
combination vehicle.                                                       Test Your Knowledge

Check That Air Flows to All Trailers. Use the                 1. Which shut-off valves should be open and
tractor parking brake and/or chock the wheels to                   which closed?
hold the vehicle. Wait for air pressure to reach
normal, then push in the red "trailer air supply"             2. How can you test that air flows to all trailers?
knob. This will supply air to the emergency (supply)          3. How can you test the tractor protection valve?
lines. Use the trailer handbrake to provide air to the        4. How can you test the trailer emergency
service line. Go to the rear of the rig. Open the
emergency line shut-off valve at the rear of the last              brakes?
trailer. You should hear air escaping, showing the            5. How can you test the trailer service brakes?
entire system is charged. Close the emergency line
valve. Open the service line valve to check that              These questions may be on your test. If you can't
service pressure goes through all the trailers (this          answer all of them, re-read subsection 6.5.
test assumes that the trailer handbrake or the
service brake pedal is on), and then close the
valve. If you do NOT hear air escaping from both
lines, check that the shut-off valves on the trailer(s)
and dolly(ies) are in the OPEN position. You MUST
have air all the way to the back for all the brakes to
work.

Test Tractor Protection Valve. Charge the trailer
Air-brake system. (That is, build up normal air-
pressure and push the "air supply" knob in.) Shut
the engine off. Step on and off the brake pedal
several times to reduce the air pressure in the
tanks. The trailer air supply control (also called the
tractor protection valve control) should pop out (or
go from "normal" to "emergency" position) when
the air pressure falls into the pressure range
specified by the manufacturer. (Usually within the
range of 20 to 45 psi.)

If the tractor protection valve doesn't work right, an
air hose or trailer brake leak could drain all the air
from the tractor. This would cause the emergency
brakes to come on, with possible loss of control.

Test Trailer Emergency Brakes. Charge the
trailer air brake system and check that the trailer
rolls freely. Then stop and pull out the trailer air
supply control (also called tractor protection valve
control or trailer emergency valve), or place it in
the "emergency" position. Pull gently on the trailer
with the tractor to check that the trailer emergency
brakes are on.

Test Trailer Service Brakes. Check for normal air
pressure, release the parking brakes, move the
vehicle forward slowly, and apply trailer brakes
with the hand control (trolley valve), if so equipped.
You should feel the brakes come on. This tells you
the trailer brakes are connected and working. (The
trailer brakes should be tested with the hand valve
but controlled in normal operation with the foot
pedal, which applies air to the service brakes at all
wheels.)

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-14
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

               THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-15
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 7                                          7.1.5 ­ Manage Space
 DOUBLES AND TRIPLES
                                                              Doubles and triples take up more space than other
This Section Covers                                           commercial vehicles. They are not only longer, but
                                                              also need more space because they can't be
 Pulling Double/Triple Trailers                               turned or stopped suddenly. Allow more following
 Coupling and Uncoupling                                      distance. Make sure you have large enough gaps
 Inspecting Doubles and Triples                               before entering or crossing traffic. Be certain you
 Checking Air Brakes                                          are clear at the sides before changing lanes.

This section has information you need to pass the             7.1.6 ­ Adverse Conditions
CDL knowledge test for driving safely with double
and triple trailers. It tells about how important it is       Be more careful in adverse conditions. In bad
to be very careful when driving with more than one            weather, slippery conditions, and mountain driving,
trailer, how to couple and uncouple correctly, and            you must be especially careful if you drive double
about inspecting doubles and triples carefully. (You          and triple bottoms. You will have greater length
should also study Sections 2, 5, and 6.)                      and more dead axles to pull with your drive axles
                                                              than other drivers. There is more chance for skids
7.1 ­ Pulling Double/Triple Trailers                          and loss of traction.

Take special care when pulling two and three                  7.1.7 ­ Parking the Vehicle
trailers. There are more things that can go wrong,
and doubles/triples are less stable than other                Make sure you do not get in a spot you cannot pull
commercial vehicles. Some areas of concern are                straight through. You need to be aware of how
discussed below.                                              parking lots are arranged in order to avoid a long
                                                              and difficult escape.
7.1.1 ­ Prevent Trailer from Rolling Over
                                                              7.1.8 ­ Antilock Braking Systems on Converter
To prevent trailers from rolling over, you must steer         Dollies
gently and go slowly around corners, on ramps, off
ramps, and curves. A safe speed on a curve for a              Converter dollies built on or after March 1, 1998,
straight truck or a single trailer combination vehicle        are required to have antilock brakes. These dollies
may be too fast for a set of doubles or triples.              will have a yellow lamp on the left side of the dolly.

7.1.2 ­ Beware of the Crack-the-whip Effect                   7.2 ­ Coupling and Uncoupling

Doubles and triples are more likely to turn over              Knowing how to couple and uncouple correctly is
than other combination vehicles because of the                basic to safe operation of doubles and triples.
"crack-the-whip" effect. You must steer gently                Wrong coupling and uncoupling can be very
when pulling trailers. The last trailer in a                  dangerous. Coupling and uncoupling steps for
combination is most likely to turn over. If you don't         doubles and triples are listed below.
understand the crack-the-whip effect, study
subsection 6.1.2 of this manual.                              7.2.1 ­ Coupling Twin Trailers

7.1.3 ­ Inspect Completely                                    Secure Second (Rear) Trailer

There are more critical parts to check when you               If the second trailer doesn't have spring brakes,
have two or three trailers. Check them all. Follow            drive the tractor close to the trailer, connect the
the procedures described later in this section.               emergency line, charge the trailer air tank, and
                                                              disconnect the emergency line. This will set the
7.1.4 ­ Look Far Ahead                                        trailer emergency brakes (if the slack adjusters are
                                                              correctly adjusted). Chock the wheels if you have
Doubles and triples must be driven very smoothly              any doubt about the brakes.
to avoid rollover or jackknife. Therefore, look far
ahead so you can slow down or change lanes                    For the safest handling on the road, the more
gradually when necessary.                                     heavily loaded semitrailer should be in first position
                                                              behind the tractor. The lighter trailer should be in
                                                              the rear.

Section 7 - Doubles and Triples                               Page 7-1
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

A converter gear on a dolly is a coupling device of           Connect Converter Dolly to Rear Trailer
one or two axles and a fifth wheel by which a
semitrailer can be coupled to the rear of a tractor-          Make sure trailer brakes are locked and/or wheels
trailer combination forming a double bottom rig.              chocked.
See Figure 7.1.
                                                              Make sure trailer height is correct. (It must be
                           Figure 7.1                         slightly lower than the center of the fifth wheel, so
                                                              trailer is raised slightly when dolly is pushed
Position Converter Dolly in Front of Second                   under.)
(Rear) Trailer
                                                              Back converter dolly under rear trailer.
Release dolly brakes by opening the air tank
petcock. (Or, if the dolly has spring brakes, use the         Raise landing gear slightly off ground to prevent
dolly parking brake control.)                                 damage if trailer moves.

If the distance is not too great, wheel the dolly into        Test coupling by pulling against pin of the second
position by hand so it is in line with the kingpin.           semitrailer.

Or, use the tractor and first semitrailer to pick up          Make visual check of coupling. (No space between
the converter dolly:                                          upper and lower fifth wheel. Locking jaws closed
Position combination as close as possible to                  on kingpin.)
converter dolly.
Move dolly to rear of first semitrailer and couple it         Connect safety chains, air hoses, and light cords.
to the trailer.
Lock pintle hook.                                             Close converter dolly air tank petcock and shut-off
Secure dolly support in raised position.                      valves at rear of second trailer (service and
Pull dolly into position as close as possible to nose         emergency shut-offs).
of the second semitrailer.
Lower dolly support.                                          Open shut-off valves at rear of first trailer (and on
Unhook dolly from first trailer.                              dolly if so equipped).
Wheel dolly into position in front of second trailer in
line with the kingpin.                                        Raise landing gear completely.

Connect Converter Dolly to Front Trailer                      Charge trailer brakes (push "air supply" knob in),
Back first semitrailer into position in front of dolly        and check for air at rear of second trailer by
tongue.                                                       opening the emergency line shut-off. If air pressure
Hook dolly to front trailer.                                  isn't there, something is wrong and the brakes
Lock pintle hook.                                             won't work.
Secure converter gear support in raised position.
                                                              7.2.2 ­ Uncoupling Twin Trailers

                                                              Uncouple Rear Trailer

                                                              Park rig in a straight line on firm level ground.

                                                              Apply parking brakes so rig won't move.

                                                              Chock wheels of second trailer if it doesn't have
                                                              spring brakes.

                                                              Lower landing gear of second semitrailer enough
                                                              to remove some weight from dolly.

                                                              Close air shut-offs at rear of first semitrailer (and
                                                              on dolly if so equipped).

                                                              Disconnect all dolly air and electric lines and
                                                              secure them.

                                                              Release dolly brakes.

                                                              Release converter dolly fifth wheel latch.

                                                              Slowly pull tractor, first semitrailer, and dolly
                                                              forward to pull dolly out from under rear semitrailer.

Section 7 - Doubles and Triples                               Page 7-2
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Uncouple Converter Dolly                                      also some new things to check. These are
                                                              discussed below.
Lower dolly landing gear.
                                                              7.3.1 ­ Additional Checks
Disconnect safety chains.
                                                              Do these checks in addition to those already listed
Apply converter gear spring brakes or chock                   in Section 2, Step 5: Do a Walk-around Inspection.
wheels.
                                                              Coupling System Areas
Release pintle hook on first semi-trailer.                    Check fifth wheel (lower).

Slowly pull clear of dolly.                                        Securely mounted to frame.
                                                                   No missing or damaged parts.
Never unlock the pintle hook with the dolly still                  Enough grease.
under the rear trailer. The dolly tow bar may fly up,              No visible space between upper and lower fifth
possibly causing injury, and making it very difficult              wheel.
to re-couple.                                                      Locking jaws around the shank, not the head
                                                                   of kingpin.
7.2.3 ­ Coupling and Uncoupling Triple Trailers                    Release arm properly seated and safety
                                                                   latch/lock engaged.
Couple Tractor/First Semitrailer to                           Check fifth wheel (upper).
Second/Third Trailers                                              Glide plate securely mounted to trailer frame.
                                                                   Kingpin not damaged.
Couple tractor to first trailer. Use the method               Air and electric lines to trailer.
already described for coupling tractor-semitrailers.               Electrical cord firmly plugged in and secured.
                                                                   Air-lines properly connected to glad hands, no
Move converter dolly into position and couple first                air leaks, properly secured with enough slack
trailer to second trailer using the method for                     for turns.
coupling doubles. Triples rig is now complete.                     All lines free from damage.
                                                              Sliding fifth wheel.
Uncouple Triple-trailer Rig                                        Slide not damaged or parts missing.
                                                                   Properly greased.
Uncouple third trailer by pulling the dolly out, then              All locking pins present and locked in place.
unhitching the dolly using the method for                          If air powered, no air leaks.
uncoupling doubles.                                                Check that fifth wheel is not so far forward that
                                                                   the tractor frame will hit landing gear, or cab
Uncouple remainder of rig as you would any                         will hit the trailer, during turns.
double-bottom rig using the method already                    Landing Gear
described.                                                         Fully raised, no missing parts, not bent or
                                                                   otherwise damaged.
7.2.4 ­ Coupling and Uncoupling Other                              Crank handle in place and secured.
Combinations                                                       If power operated, no air or hydraulic leaks.

The methods described so far apply to the more                Double and Triple Trailers
common tractor-trailer combinations. However,                 Shut-off valves (at rear of trailers, in service and
there are other ways of coupling and uncoupling               emergency lines).
the many types of truck-trailer and tractor-trailer
combinations that are in use. There are too many                   Rear of front trailers: OPEN.
to cover in this manual. You will need to learn the
correct way to couple and uncouple the vehicle(s)                                                                                   Page 7-3
you will drive according to the manufacturer and/or
owner specifications.

7.3 ­ Inspecting Doubles and Triples

Use the seven-step inspection procedure
described in Section 2 to inspect your combination
vehicle. There are more things to inspect on a
combination vehicle than on a single vehicle. Many
of these items are simply more of what you would
find on a single vehicle. (For example, tires,
wheels, lights, reflectors, etc.) However, there are

Section 7 - Doubles and Triples
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

     Rear of last trailer: CLOSED.                            tractor protection valve control) should pop out (or
                                                              go from "normal" to "emergency" position) when
     Converter dolly air tank drain valve: CLOSED.            the air pressure falls into the pressure range
                                                              specified by the manufacturer. (Usually within the
Be sure air-lines are supported and glad hands are            range of 20 to 45 psi.)
properly connected.
                                                              If the tractor protection valve doesn't work properly,
If spare tire is carried on converter gear (dolly),           an air hose or trailer brake leak could drain all the
make sure it's secured.                                       air from the tractor. This would cause the
                                                              emergency brakes to come on, with possible loss
Be sure pintle-eye of dolly is in place in pintle hook        of control.
of trailer(s).
                                                              Test Trailer Emergency Brakes. Charge the
Make sure pintle hook is latched.                             trailer air brake system and check that the trailer
                                                              rolls freely. Then stop and pull out the trailer air
Safety chains should be secured to trailer(s).                supply control (also called tractor protection valve
                                                              control or trailer emergency valve) or place it in the
Be sure light cords are firmly in sockets on trailers.        "emergency" position. Pull gently on the trailer with
                                                              the tractor to check that the trailer emergency
7.3.2 ­ Additional Things to Check during a                   brakes are on.
Walk-around Inspection
Do these checks in addition to subsection 5.3,                Test Trailer Service Brakes. Check for normal air
Inspecting Air Brake Systems.                                 pressure, release the parking brakes, move the
                                                              vehicle forward slowly, and apply trailer brakes
7.4 ­ Doubles/Triples Air Brake Check                         with the hand control (trolley valve), if so equipped.
                                                              You should feel the brakes come on. This tells you
Check the brakes on a double or triple trailer as             the trailer brakes are connected and working. (The
you would any combination vehicle. Subsection                 trailer brakes should be tested with the hand valve,
6.5.2 explains how to check air brakes on                     but controlled in normal operation with the foot
combination vehicles. You must also make the                  pedal, which applies air to the service brakes at all
following checks on your double or triple trailers            wheels.)

7.4.1 ­ Additional Air Brake Checks                                                      Section 7
                                                                                Test Your Knowledge
Check That Air Flows to All Trailers (Double
and Triple Trailers). Use the tractor parking brake           1. What is a converter dolly?
and/or chock the wheels to hold the vehicle. Wait             2. Do converter dollies have spring brakes?
for air pressure to reach normal, then push in the            3. What three methods can you use to secure a
red "trailer air supply" knob. This will supply air to
the emergency (supply) lines. Use the trailer                         second trailer before coupling?
handbrake to provide air to the service line. Go to           4. How do you check to make sure trailer
the rear of the rig. Open the emergency line shut-
off valve at the rear of the last trailer. You should                 height is correct before coupling?
hear air escaping, showing the entire system is               5. What do you check when making a visual
charged. Close the emergency line valve. Open
the service line valve to check that service                          check of coupling?
pressure goes through all the trailers (this test             6. Why should you pull a dolly out from under a
assumes that the trailer handbrake or the service
brake pedal is on), and then close the valve. If you                  trailer before you disconnect it from the
do NOT hear air escaping from both lines, check                       trailer in front?
that the shut-off valves on the trailer(s) and                7. What should you check for when inspecting
dolly(ies) are in the OPEN position. You MUST                         the converter dolly? The pintle hook?
have air all the way to the back for all the brakes to        8. Should the shut-off valves on the rear of the
work.                                                                 last trailer be open or closed? On the first
                                                                      trailer in a set of doubles? On the middle
Test Tractor Protection Valve. Charge the trailer                     trailer of a set of triples?
air brake system. (That is, build up normal air               9. How can you test that air flows to all trailers?
pressure and push the "air supply" knob in.) Shut             10. How do you know if your converter dolly is
the engine off. Step on and off the brake pedal                       equipped with antilock brakes?
several times to reduce the air pressure in the
tanks. The trailer air supply control (also called the        These questions may be on your test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read Section 7.

Section 7 - Doubles and Triples                               Page 7-4
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 8                                          Check manhole covers and vents. Make sure the
      TANK VEHICLES                                           covers have gaskets and they close correctly.
                                                              Keep the vents clear so they work correctly.
This Section Covers
                                                              8.1.2 ­ Check Special Purpose Equipment
 Inspecting Tank Vehicles                                     If your vehicle has any of the following equipment,
 Driving Tank Vehicles                                        make sure it works:
 Safe Driving Rules                                           Vapor recovery kits.
                                                              Grounding and bonding cables.
This section has information needed to pass the               Emergency shut-off systems.
CDL knowledge test for driving a tank vehicle. (You           Built in fire extinguisher.
should also study Sections 2, 5, 6, and 9). A tank            Never drive a tank vehicle with open valves or
endorsement is required for certain vehicles that             manhole covers.
transport liquids or gases. The liquid or gas does
not have to be a hazardous material. A tank                   8.1.3 ­ Special Equipment
endorsement is required if your vehicle needs a               Check the emergency equipment required for your
Class A or B CDL and you want to haul a liquid or             vehicle. Find out what equipment you're required to
liquid gas in a tank or tanks having an individual            carry and make sure you have it (and it works).
rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an
aggregate rated capacity of 1000 gallons or more              8.2 ­ Driving Tank Vehicles
that is either permanently or temporarily attached
to the vehicle or the chassis. A tank endorsement             Hauling liquids in tanks requires special skills
is also required for Class C vehicles when the                because of the high center of gravity and liquid
vehicle is used to transport hazardous materials in           movement. See Figure 8.1.
liquid or gas form in the above described rated
tanks.

Before loading, unloading, or driving a tanker,
inspect the vehicle. This makes sure that the
vehicle is safe to carry the liquid or gas and is safe
to drive.

8.1 ­ Inspecting Tank Vehicles                                                           Figure 8.1

Tank vehicles have special items that you need to             8.2.1 ­ High Center of Gravity
check. Tank vehicles come in many types and                   High center of gravity means that much of the
sizes. You need to check the vehicle's operator               load's weight is carried high up off the road. This
manual to make sure you know how to inspect                   makes the vehicle top-heavy and easy to roll over.
your tank vehicle.                                            Liquid tankers are especially easy to roll over.
                                                              Tests have shown that tankers can turn over at the
8.1.1 ­ Leaks                                                 speed limits posted for curves. Take highway
                                                              curves and on ramp/off ramp curves well below the
On all tank vehicles, the most important item to              posted speeds.
check for is leaks. Check under and around the
vehicle for signs of any leaking. Don't carry liquids                                                                               Page 8-1
or gases in a leaking tank. To do so is a crime. You
will be cited and prevented from driving further.
You may also be liable for the clean-up of any spill.
In general, check the following:

Check the tank's body or shell for dents or leaks.

Check the intake, discharge, and cut-off valves.
Make sure the valves are in the correct position
before loading, unloading, or moving the vehicle.

Check pipes, connections, and hoses for leaks,
especially around joints.

Section 8 - Tank Vehicles
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

8.2.2 ­ Danger of Surge                                       Legal weight limits.

Liquid surge results from movement of the liquid in           8.3 ­ Safe Driving Rules
partially filled tanks. This movement can have bad
effects on handling. For example, when coming to              In order to drive tank vehicles safely, you must
a stop, the liquid will surge back and forth. When            remember to follow all the safe driving rules. A few
the wave hits the end of the tank, it tends to push           of these rules are:
the truck in the direction the wave is moving. If the
truck is on a slippery surface such as ice, the wave          8.3.1 ­ Drive Smoothly
can shove a stopped truck out into an intersection.
The driver of a liquid tanker must be very familiar           Because of the high center of gravity and the surge
with the handling of the vehicle.                             of the liquid, you must start, slow down, and stop
                                                              very smoothly. Also, make smooth turns and lane
8.2.3 ­ Bulkheads                                             changes.

Some liquid tanks are divided into several smaller            8.3.2 ­ Controlling Surge
tanks by bulkheads. When loading and unloading
the smaller tanks, the driver must pay attention to           Keep a steady pressure on the brakes. Do not
weight distribution. Don't put too much weight on             release too soon when coming to a stop.
the front or rear of the vehicle.
                                                              Brake far in advance of a stop and increase your
8.2.4 ­ Baffled Tanks                                         following distance.

Baffled liquid tanks have bulkheads in them with              If you must make a quick stop to avoid a crash,
holes that let the liquid flow through. The baffles           use controlled or stab braking. If you do not
help to control the forward and backward liquid               remember how to stop using these methods,
surge. Side-to-side surge can still occur. This can           review subsection 2.17.2. Also, remember that if
cause a roll over.                                            you steer quickly while braking, your vehicle may
                                                              roll over.
8.2.5 ­ Un-baffled Tanks
                                                              8.3.3 ­ Curves
Un-baffled liquid tankers (sometimes called
"smooth bore" tanks) have nothing inside to slow              Slow down before curves, then accelerate slightly
down the flow of the liquid. Therefore, forward-and-          through the curve. The posted speed for a curve
back surge is very strong. Un-baffled tanks are               may be too fast for a tank vehicle.
usually those that transport food products (milk, for
example). (Sanitation regulations forbid the use of           8.3.4 ­ Stopping Distance
baffles because of the difficulty in cleaning the
inside of the tank.) Be extremely cautious (slow              Keep in mind how much space you need to stop
and careful) in driving smooth bore tanks,                    your vehicle. Remember that wet roads double the
especially when starting and stopping.                        normal stopping distance. Empty tank vehicles
                                                              may take longer to stop than full ones.
8.2.6 ­ Outage
                                                              8.3.5 ­ Skids
Never load a cargo tank totally full. Liquids expand
as they warm and you must leave room for the                  Don't over steer, over accelerate, or over brake. If
expanding liquid. This is called "outage." Since              you do, your vehicle may skid. On tank trailers, if
different liquids expand by different amounts, they           your drive wheels or trailer wheels begin to skid,
require different amounts of outage. You must                 your vehicle may jackknife. When any vehicle
know the outage requirement when hauling liquids              starts to skid, you must take action to restore
in bulk.                                                      traction to the wheels.

8.2.7 ­ How Much to Load?                                                 Section 8
                                                                  Test Your Knowledge
A full tank of dense liquid (such as some acids)
may exceed legal weight limits. For that reason,              1.  How are bulkheads different than baffles?
you may often only partially fill tanks with heavy
liquids. The amount of liquid to load into a tank             2.  Should a tank vehicle take curves, on
depends on:
                                                                  ramps, or off ramps at the posted speed
The amount the liquid will expand in transit.
                                                                  limits?
The weight of the liquid.
                                                                                       Page 8-2
Section 8 - Tank Vehicles
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

3.  How are smooth bore tankers different to

    drive than those with baffles?

4.  What three things determine how much

    liquid you can load?

5.  What is outage?

6.  How can you help control surge?

7.  What two reasons make special care

    necessary when driving tank vehicles?

These questions may be on the test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read Section 8.

Section 8 - Tank Vehicles                                     Page 8-3
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                     THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.

Section 8 - Tank Vehicles                                     Page 8-4
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 9                                          You must have a commercial driver license (CDL)
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS                                           with a hazardous materials endorsement before
                                                              you drive any size vehicle that is used to transport
             This Section Covers                              hazardous material as defined in 49 CFR 383.5.
                                                              You must pass a written test about the regulations
                                                              and requirements to get this endorsement.

 The Intent of the Regulations                                Everything you need to know to pass the written
 Bulk Tank Loading, Unloading, and                            test is in this section. However, this is only a
                                                              beginning. Most drivers need to know much more
    Marking                                                   on the job. You can learn more by reading and
 Driver Responsibilities                                      understanding the federal and state rules
 Driving and Parking Rules                                    applicable to hazardous materials, as well as,
 Communications Rules                                         attending hazardous materials training courses.
 Emergencies                                                  Your employer, colleges and universities, and
 Loading and Unloading                                        various associations usually offer these courses.
                                                              You can get copies of the Federal Regulations (49
Hazardous materials are products that pose a risk             CFR) through your local Government Printing
to health, safety, and property during                        Office bookstore and various industry publishers.
transportation. The term often is shortened to                Union or company offices often have copies of the
HAZMAT, which you may see on road signs, or to                rules for driver use. Find out where you can get
HM in government regulations. Hazardous                       your own copy to use on the job.
materials include explosives, various types of gas,
solids, flammable and combustible liquid, and other           The regulations require training and testing for all
materials. Because of the risks involved and the              drivers involved in transporting hazardous
potential consequences these risks impose, all                materials. Your employer or a designated
levels of government regulate the handling of                 representative is required to provide this training
hazardous materials.                                          and testing. Hazardous materials employers are
                                                              required to keep a record of training for each
The Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR) is                  employee as long as that employee is working with
found in parts 171 - 180 of title 49 of the Code of           hazardous materials, and for 90 days thereafter.
Federal Regulations. The common reference for                 The regulations require that hazardous materials
these regulations is 49 CFR 171 - 180                         employees be trained and tested at least once
                                                              every three years.

The Hazardous Materials Table in the regulations              All drivers must be trained in the security risks of
contains a list of these items. However, this list is         hazardous materials transportation. This training
not all-inclusive. Whether or not a material is               must include how to recognize and respond to
considered hazardous is based on its                          possible security threats.
characteristics and the shipper's decision on
whether or not the material meets a definition of a           The regulations also require that drivers have
hazardous material in the regulations.                        special training before driving a vehicle
                                                              transporting certain flammable gas materials or
The regulations require vehicles transporting                 highway route controlled quantities of radioactive
certain types or quantities of hazardous materials            materials. In addition, drivers transporting cargo
to display diamond-shaped, square on point,                   tanks and portable tanks must receive specialized
warning signs called placards.                                training. Each driver's employer or his or her
                                                              designated representative must provide such
This section is designed to assist you in                     training.
understanding your role and responsibilities in
hauling hazardous materials. Due to the constantly            Some locations require permits to transport certain
changing nature of government regulations, it is              explosives or bulk hazardous wastes. States and
impossible to guarantee absolute accuracy of the              counties also may require drivers to follow special
materials in this section. An up-to-date copy of the          hazardous materials routes. The federal
complete regulations is essential for you to have.            government may require permits or exemptions for
Included in these regulations is a complete                   special hazardous materials cargo such as rocket
glossary of terms.                                            fuel. Find out about permits, exemptions, and
                                                              special routes for the places you drive.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-1
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

9.1 ­ The Intent of the Regulations                           Proper shipping name.
                                                              Hazard class.
9.1.1 ­ Contain the Material                                  Packing group.
                                                              Correct packaging.
Transporting hazardous materials can be risky.                Correct label and markings.
The regulations are intended to protect you, those            Correct placards.
around you, and the environment. They tell                    Must package, mark, and label the materials;
shippers how to package the materials safely and              prepare shipping papers; provide emergency
drivers how to load, transport, and unload the                response information; and supply placards.
material. These are called "containment rules."               Certify on the shipping paper that the shipment has
                                                              been prepared according to the rules (unless you
9.1.2 ­ Communicate the Risk                                  are pulling cargo tanks supplied by you or your
                                                              employer).
To communicate the risk, shippers must warn
drivers and others about the material's hazards.              9.2.2 ­ The Carrier
The regulations require shippers to put hazard                Takes the shipment from the shipper to its
warning labels on packages, provide proper                    destination.
shipping papers, emergency response information,              Prior to transportation, checks that the shipper
and placards. These steps communicate the                     correctly described, marked, labeled, and
hazard to the shipper, the carrier, and the driver.           otherwise prepared the shipment for transportation.
                                                              Refuses improper shipments.
9.1.3 ­ Assure Safe Drivers and Equipment
                                                              9.2.3 ­ The Driver
In order to get a hazardous materials endorsement             Makes sure the shipper has identified, marked, and
on a CDL, you must pass a written test about                  labeled the hazardous materials properly.
transporting hazardous materials. To pass the test,           Refuses leaking packages and shipments.
you must know how to:                                         Placards vehicle when loading, if required.
                                                              Safely transports the shipment without delay.
Identify what are hazardous materials.                        Follows all special rules about transporting
                                                              hazardous materials.
Safely load shipments.                                        Keeps hazardous materials shipping papers and
                                                              emergency response information in the proper
Properly placard your vehicle in accordance with              place.
the rules.                                                    Reports accidents and incidents involving
                                                              hazardous materials to the proper government
Safely transport shipments.                                   agency, when the accident/incident occurs while
                                                              driver is in physical control of the shipment.
Learn the rules and follow them. Following the
rules reduces the risk of injury from hazardous               9.3 ­ Communication Rules
materials. Taking shortcuts by breaking rules is
unsafe. Non-compliance with regulations can result            9.3.1 ­ Definitions
in fines and jail.

Inspect your vehicle before and during each trip.
Law enforcement officers may stop and inspect
your vehicle. When stopped, they may check your
shipping papers, vehicle placards, and the
hazardous materials endorsement on your driver
license, and your knowledge of hazardous
materials.

9.2 ­ Hazardous Materials
Transportation--Who Does What

9.2.1 ­ The Shipper                                           Some words and phrases have special meanings
                                                              when talking about hazardous materials. Some of
Sends products from one place to another by truck,            these may differ from meanings you are used to.
rail, vessel, or airplane.                                    The words and phrases in this section may be on
                                                              your test. The meanings of other important words
Uses the hazardous materials regulations to                   are in the glossary at the end of Section 9.
determine the product's:
                                                                                                                                     Page 9-2
Identification number

Section 9 - Hazardous Material
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

A material's hazard class reflects the risks                  being carried. Your life, and the lives of others,
associated with it. There are nine different hazard           may depend on quickly locating the hazardous
classes. The types of materials included in these             materials shipping papers. For that reason the
nine classes are in Figure 9.1.                               rules require:

               Hazardous Materials Class                      Shippers to describe hazardous materials correctly
                                                              and include an emergency response telephone
        Division  Name of Class or     Examples               number on shipping papers.
Class             Division
                                                              Carriers and drivers to quickly identify hazardous
       1.1 Mass Explosion              Dynamite               materials shipping papers, or keep them on top of
       1.2 Projection Hazard           Flares                 other shipping papers and keep the required
       1.3 Fire Hazard                 Display Fireworks      emergency response information with the shipping
1 1.4 Minor Explosion                  Ammunition             papers.
       1.5 Very Insensitive            Blasting Agents
       1.6 Extremely                   Explosive Devices      Drivers to keep hazardous materials shipping
                                                              papers:
                Insensitive
                                                                   In a pouch on the driver's door, or
   2.1 Flammable Gases                 Propane
                                       Helium                      In clear view within immediate reach while the
2  2.2            Non-Flammable                                    seat belt is fastened while driving, or
                  Gases                Fluorine, Compressed
                                                                   On the driver's seat when out of the vehicle.
   2.3 Poisonous/Toxic                 Gasoline
                                                              9.3.2 ­ Package Labels
                  Gases                Ammonium Picrate,
                                       Wetted                 Shippers put diamond-shaped hazard warning
3-                Flammable Liquids    White Phosphorus       labels on most hazardous materials packages.
                                       Sodium                 These labels inform others of the hazard. If the
4  4.1            Flammable Solids                            diamond label won't fit on the package, shippers
   4.2            Spontaneously                               may put the label on a tag securely attached to the
                  Combustible                                 package. For example, compressed gas cylinders
                                                              that will not hold a label will have tags or decals.
   4.3            Dangerous When                              Labels look like the examples in Figure 9.2.
                  Wet

5  5.1            Oxidizers            Ammonium Nitrate
   5.2            Organic Peroxides    Methyl Ethyl Ketone
                                       Peroxide

       6.1        Poison (Toxic        Potassium Cyanide
6                 Material)
                  Infectious           Anthrax Virus
       6.2        Substances
                  Radioactive          Uranium
7-                Corrosives           Battery Fluid
8-                Miscellaneous        Polychlorinated
                  Hazardous Materials  Biphenyls (PCB)
9-
                  ORM-D (Other         Food Flavorings,
N                 Regulated Material-  Medicines
                  Domestic)
o  -                                   Fuel Oil
n                 Combustible Liquids

e

   -

                         Figure 9.1

A shipping paper describes the hazardous
materials being transported. Shipping orders, bills
of lading, and manifests are all shipping papers.
Figure 9.6 shows an example shipping paper.

After an accident or hazardous materials spill or             Examples of HAZMAT Labels. Figure 9.2
leak, you may be injured and unable to
communicate the hazards of the materials you are
transporting. Firefighters and police can prevent or
reduce the amount of damage or injury at the
scene if they know what hazardous materials are

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-3
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

9.3.3 ­ Lists of Regulated Products                           Appendix B to Section 172.101, the List of Marine
                                                              Pollutants.
Placards. Placards are used to warn others of
hazardous materials. Placards are signs put on the            The Hazardous Materials Table. Figure 9.4
outside of a vehicle and on bulk packages, which              shows part of the Hazardous Materials Table.
identify the hazard class of the cargo. A placarded
vehicle must have at least four identical placards.           Column 1 tells which shipping mode(s) the entry
                                                              affects and other information concerning the
They are put on the front, rear, and both sides of            shipping description. The next five columns show
the vehicle. See Figure 9.3. Placards must be                 each material's shipping name, hazard class or
readable from all four directions. They are at least          division, identification number, packaging group,
250 mm 9.84 inches square, square-on-point, in a              and required labels.
diamond shape. Cargo tanks and other bulk
packaging display the identification number of their          Six different symbols may appear in Column 1 of
contents on placards or orange panels or white                the table.
square-on-point displays that are the same size as
placards.                                                      (+)  Shows the proper shipping name, hazard
                                                               (A)  class, and packing group to use, even if
           Examples of HAZMAT Placards                         (W)  the material doesn't meet the hazard class
                           Figure 9.3                               definition.
                                                               (D)
Identification numbers are a four-digit code used              (I)  Means the hazardous material described
by first responders to identify hazardous materials.          (G)   in Column 2 is subject to the HMR only
An identification number may be used to identify                    when offered or intended for transport by
more than one chemical. The letters "NA or "UN"                     air unless it is a hazardous substance or
will precede the identification number. The United                  hazardous waste.
States Department of Transportation's Emergency
Response Guidebook (ERG) lists the chemicals                        Means the hazardous material described
and the identification numbers assigned to them.                    in Column 2 is subject to the HMR only
                                                                    when offered or intended for transportation
There are three main lists used by shippers,                        by water unless it is a hazardous
carriers, and drivers when trying to identify                       substance, hazardous waste, or marine
hazardous materials. Before transporting a                          pollutant.
material, look for its name on three lists. Some
materials are on all lists, others on only one.                     Means the proper shipping name is
Always check the following lists:                                   appropriate for describing materials for
Section 172.101, the Hazardous Materials Table.                     domestic transportation, but may not be
Appendix A to Section 172.101, the List of                          proper for international transportation.
Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities.
                                                                    Identifies a proper shipping name that is
                                                                    used to describe materials in international
                                                                    transportation. A different shipping name
                                                                    may be used when only domestic
                                                                    transportation is involved.

                                                                    Means this hazardous material described
                                                                    in Column 2 is a generic shipping name. A
                                                                    generic shipping name must be
                                                                    accompanied by a technical name on the
                                                                    shipping paper. A technical name is a
                                                                    specific chemical that makes the product
                                                                    hazardous

                                                              Column 2 lists the proper shipping names and
                                                              descriptions of regulated materials. Entries are in
                                                              alphabetical order so you can more quickly find the
                                                              right entry. The table shows proper shipping
                                                              names in regular type. The shipping paper must
                                                              show proper shipping names. Names shown in
                                                              italics are not proper shipping names.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                      Page 9-4
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                               49 CFR 172.101 Hazardous Materials Table

                                                                                     Packaging (173. ***)

Symbols  Hazardous Materials   Hazard     Identification      PG  Label  Special
         Description & Proper  Class or   Numbers                 Codes  Provisions
         Shipping Names        Division                                  (172.102)
                                                                                                 Non
                                                                                     Exceptions  Bulk      Bulk

(1)      (2)                   (3)        (4)                 (5) (6)    (7)         (8A)        (8B) (8C)
                                                                                                 204 240
A        Acetaldehyde ammonia 9           UN1841              III 9      IB8, IP3, 155

                                                                         IP7, T1,

                                                                         TP33

                                               Figure 9.4

                                 Appendix A to 49 CFR 172.101
              List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities

              Hazardous Substances             Reportable Quantity (RQ) Pounds
                                               (Kilograms)
              Phenyl mercaptan
              Phenylmercury acetate            100 (45.4)
              Phenylthiourea                   100 (45.4)
              Phorate                          100 (45.4)
              Phosgene                         10 (4.54)

              Phosphine                        10 (4.54)

              Phosphoric acid                  100 (45.4)

              Phosphoric acid, diethyl         5,000 (2270)
              4-nitrophenyl ester              100 (45.4)
              Phosphoric acid, lead (2+)
              Salt (2:3) salt                  10 (4.54)

                                               Figure 9.5

Column 3 shows a material's hazard class or                   associated with proper shipping names recognized
division, or the entry "Forbidden." Never transport           by the International Civil Aviation Organization
a "Forbidden" material. Placard hazardous                     (IACO) Technical instructions for transportation by
materials shipments based on the quantity and                 air. The identification number must appear on the
hazard class. You can decide which placards to                shipping paper as part of the shipping description
use if you know these three things:                           and also appear on the package. It also must
                                                              appear on cargo tanks and other bulk packaging.
Material's hazard class.                                      Police and firefighters use this number to quickly
                                                              identify the hazardous materials.
Amount being shipped.
                                                              Column 5 shows the packing group (in Roman
Amount of all hazardous materials of all classes on           numeral) assigned to a material.
your vehicle.
                                                              Column 6 shows the hazard warning label(s)
Column 4 lists the identification number for each             shippers must put on packages of hazardous
proper shipping name. Identification numbers are              materials. Some products require use of more than
preceded by the letters "UN", "NA", or "ID." The              one label due to multiple hazards being present.
letters "NA" are associated with proper shipping
names that are only used within the United States                                                                                    Page 9-5
and to and from Canada. The letters "ID" are

Section 9 - Hazardous Material
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Column 7 lists the additional (special) provisions            9.3.4 ­ The Shipping Paper
that apply to this material. When there is an entry
in this column, you must refer to the federal                 The shipping paper shown in Figure 9.6 describes
regulations for specific information. The numbers             a shipment. A shipping paper for hazardous
1-6 in this column mean the hazardous material is             materials must include:
a poison inhalation hazard (PIH). PIH materials
have special requirements for shipping papers,                Page numbers if the shipping paper has more than
marking, and placards.                                        one page. The first page must tell the total number
                                                              of pages. For example, "Page 1 of 4".
Column 8 is a three-part column showing the
section numbers covering the packaging                        A proper shipping description for each hazardous
requirements for each hazardous material.                     material.

Note: Columns 9 and 10 do not apply to                        A shipper's certification, signed by the shipper,
transportation by highway.                                    saying they prepared the shipment according to
                                                              the regulations.
Appendix A to 49 CFR 172.101 - The List of
Hazardous Substances and Reportable                                            Shipping Paper
Quantities. The DOT and the EPA want to know
about spills of hazardous substances. They are                TO:       ABC                        DEF          Page
named in the List of Hazardous Substances and                 Quantity  Corporation                Corporation  1 of 1
Reportable Quantities. See Figure 9.5. Column 2                         88 Valley                  55
of the list shows each product's reportable quantity                    Street       FROM: Mountain             Weight
(RQ). When these materials are being transported                        Anywhere,                  Street
in a reportable quantity or greater in one package,                     VA                         Nowhere,
the shipper displays the letters RQ on the shipping                                                CO
paper and package. The letters RQ may appear                                  HM
before or after the basic description. You or your                                           Description
employer must report any spill of these materials,
which occurs in a reportable quantity.                        1         RQ           UN1076,Phosgene,           25 lbs
                                                              cylinder               2.3,
If the words INHALATION HAZARD appear on the                            ("RQ"        Poison, Inhalation
shipping paper or package, the rules require                            means that   Hazard,
display of the POISON INHALATION HAZARD or                              this is a    Zone A
POISON GAS placards, as appropriate. These                              reportable
placards must be used in addition to other                              quantity.)   (UN1076 is the
placards, which may be required by the product's                                     Identification
hazard class. Always display the hazard class                                        Number from
placard and the POISON INHALATION HAZARD                                             Column 4 of the
placard, even for small amounts.                                                     Hazardous materials
                                                                                     Table.
Appendix B to 49 CFR 172.101 ­ List of Marine
Pollutants                                                                           Phosgene is the
                                                                                     proper shipping
Appendix B is a listing of chemicals that are toxic                                  name from Column
to marine life. For highway transportation, this list                                2 of the Hazardous
is only used for chemicals in a container with a                                     Materials Table.
capacity of 119 gallons or more without a placard
or label as specified by the HMR.                                                               2.3 is the Hazard
                                                                                                Class from Column
Any bulk packages of a Marine Pollutant must                                                    3 of the Hazardous
display the Marine Pollutant marking (white triangle                                            Materials Table.)
with a fish and an "X" through the fish). This
marking (it is not a placard) must also be displayed          This is to certify that the above named materials are
on the outside of the vehicle. In addition, a notation        properly classified, described, packaged, marked and
must be made on the shipping papers near the                  labeled, and are in proper condition for transportation
description of the material: "Marine Pollutant".              according to the applicable regulations of the
                                                              Department of Transportation.

                                                                        DEF                Carrier:             Safety

                                                              Shipper: Corporation         Per:                 First

                                                              Per:      Smith              Date:

                                                              Date:     October 15,

                                                                        2003

                                                              Special Instructions: 24 hour Emergency Contact,

                                                              John Smith 1-800-555-5555

                                                                               Figure 9.6

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                                                                  Page 9-6
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

9.3.5 ­ The Item Description                                  Shippers also must provide emergency response
                                                              information to the motor carrier for each hazardous
If a shipping paper describes both hazardous and              material being shipped. The emergency response
non-hazardous products, the hazardous materials               information must be able to be used away from the
must be:                                                      motor vehicle and must provide information on how
                                                              to safely handle incidents involving the material. At
Entered first.                                                a minimum, it must include the following
                                                              information:
Highlighted in a contrasting color, OR.
                                                              The basic description and technical name;
Identified by an "X" placed before the shipping               Immediate hazards to health;
description (ID#, Shipping Name, Hazard Class,                Risks of fire or explosion;
Packing Group) in a column captioned "HM". The                Immediate precautions to be taken in the event of
letters "RQ" may be used instead of "X" if a                  an accident or incident;
reportable quantity needs to be identified.                   Immediate methods for handling fires;
                                                              Initial methods for handling spills or leaks in the
The basic description of hazardous materials                  absence of fires; and
includes the identification number, proper shipping           Preliminary first aid measures
name, hazard class or division, and the packing
group, if any, in that order. The packing group is            Such information can be on the shipping paper or
displayed in Roman numerals and may be                        some other document that includes the basic
preceded by "PG".                                             description and technical name of the hazardous
                                                              material. Or, it may be in a guidance book such as
Identification number, shipping name, and hazard              the Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG).
class must not be abbreviated unless specifically             Motor carriers may assist shippers by keeping an
authorized in the hazardous materials regulations.            ERG on each vehicle carrying hazardous
The description must also show:                               materials. The driver must provide the emergency
                                                              response information to any federal, state, or local
The total quantity and unit of measure.                       authority responding to a hazardous materials
                                                              incident or investigating one.
The number and type of packages (example: "6
Drums").                                                      Total quantity and number & type of packages
                                                              must appear before or after the basic description.
The letters RQ, if a reportable quantity.                     The packaging type and the unit of measurement
                                                              may be abbreviated. For example:
If the letters RQ appear, the name of the
hazardous substance (if not included in the                             10 ctns. UN1263, Paint, 3, PG II, 500 lbs.
shipping name).
                                                              The shipper of hazardous wastes must put the
For all materials with the letter "G" (Generic) in            word WASTE before the proper shipping name of
Column 1, the technical name of the hazardous                 the material on the shipping paper (hazardous
material.                                                     waste manifest). For example:

Shipping papers also must list an emergency                             UN1090, Waste Acetone, 3, PG II.
response telephone number (unless excepted).
The emergency response telephone number is the                A non-hazardous material may not be described by
responsibility of the shipper. It can be used by              using a hazard class or an identification number.
emergency responders to obtain information about
any hazardous materials involved in a spill or fire.          Shippers must keep a copy of shipping papers (or
The telephone number must be:                                 an electronic image) for a period of 2 years (3
                                                              years for hazardous waste) after the material is
The number of the person offering the hazardous               accepted by the initial carrier.
material for transportation (if the shipper/offerer is
the emergency response information (ERI)                      If one provides a carrier service only and is not the
provider); or                                                 originator of the shipment, a carrier is required to

The number of an agency or organization capable
of, and accepting responsibility for, providing the
detailed information required by paragraph (a)(2) of
this section. The person who is registered with the
ERI provider must be identified by name, or
contract number or other unique identifier assigned
by the ERI provider, on the shipping paper.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-7
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

keep a copy of the shipping paper (or an electronic           9.3.8 ­ Recognizing Hazardous Materials
image) for a period of 1 year.
                                                              Learn to recognize shipments of hazardous
IMPORTANT NOTE: To view complete regulatory                   materials. To find out if the shipment includes
requirements for the transportation of hazardous              hazardous materials, look at the shipping paper.
materials one should refer to the Code of Federal             Does it have:
Regulations, Title 49, Parts 171-180.
                                                              An entry with a proper shipping name, hazard
9.3.6 ­ Shipper's Certification                               class, and identification number?

When the shipper packages hazardous materials,                A highlighted entry, or one with an X or RQ in the
he/she certifies that the package has been                    hazardous materials column?
prepared according to the rules. The signed
shipper's certification appears on the original               Other clues suggesting hazardous materials:
shipping paper. The only exceptions are when a
shipper is a private carrier transporting their own           What business is the shipper in? Paint dealer?
product and when the package is provided by the               Chemical supply? Scientific supply house? Pest
carrier (for example, a cargo tank). Unless a                 control or agricultural supplier? Explosives,
package is clearly unsafe or does not comply with             munitions, or fireworks dealer?
the HMR, you may accept the shipper's
certification concerning proper packaging. Some               Are there tanks with diamond labels or placards on
carriers have additional rules about transporting             the premises?
hazardous materials. Follow your employer's rules
when accepting shipments.                                     What type of package is being shipped? Cylinders
                                                              and drums are often used for hazardous materials
9.3.7 ­ Package Markings and Labels                           shipments.

Shippers print required markings directly on the              Is a hazard class label, proper shipping name, or
package, an attached label, or tag. An important              identification number on the package?
package marking is the name of the hazardous
material. It is the same name as the one on the               Are there any handling precautions?
shipping paper. The requirements for marking vary
by package size and material being transported.               9.3.9 ­ Hazardous Waste Manifest
When required, the shipper will put the following on
the package:                                                  When transporting hazardous wastes, you must
                                                              sign by hand and carry a Uniform Hazardous
The name and address of shipper or consignee.                 Waste Manifest. The name and EPA registration
                                                              number of the shippers, carriers, and destination
The hazardous material's shipping name and                    must appear on the manifest. Shippers must
identification number.                                        prepare, date, and sign by hand the manifest.
                                                              Treat the manifest as a shipping paper when
The labels required.                                          transporting the waste. Only give the waste
                                                              shipment to another registered carrier or
It is a good idea to compare the shipping paper to            disposal/treatment facility. Each carrier
the markings and labels. Always make sure that                transporting the shipment must sign by hand the
the shipper shows the correct basic description on            manifest. After you deliver the shipment, keep your
the shipping paper, and verifies that the proper              copy of the manifest. Each copy must have all
labels are shown on the packages. If you are not              needed signatures and dates, including those of
familiar with the material, ask the shipper to                the person to whom you delivered the waste.
contact your office.
                                                              9.3.10 ­ Placarding
If rules require it, the shipper will put RQ, MARINE
POLLUTANT, BIOHAZARD, HOT, or                                 Attach the appropriate placards to the vehicle
INHALATION-HAZARD on the package. Packages                    before you drive it. You are only allowed to move
with liquid containers inside will also have package          an improperly placarded vehicle during an
orientation markings with the arrows pointing in the          emergency, in order to protect life or property.
correct upright direction. The labels used always
reflect the hazard class of the product. If a package         Placards must appear on both sides and both ends
needs more than one label, the labels must be                 of the vehicle. Each placard must be:
close together, near the proper shipping name.
                                                              Easily seen from the direction it faces.

                                                              Placed so the words or numbers are level and read
                                                              from left to right.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-8
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

At least three inches away from any other                     You have 1,001 pounds or more of two or more
markings.                                                     Table 2 hazard classes, requiring different
                                                              placards, and
Kept clear of attachments or devices such as
ladders, doors, and tarpaulins.                               You have not loaded 2,205 pounds or more of any
                                                              Table 2 hazard class material at any one place.
Kept clean and undamaged so that the color,                   (You must use the specific placard for this
format, and message are easily seen.                          material.)

Be affixed to a background of contrasting color.              The dangerous placard is an option, not a
                                                              requirement. You can always placard for the
The use of "Drive Safely" and other slogans is                materials.
prohibited.
                                                              If the words INHALATION HAZARD are on the
The front placard may be on the front of the tractor          shipping paper or package, you must display
or the front of the trailer.                                  POISON GAS or POISON INHALATION placards
                                                              in addition to any other placards needed by the
To decide which placards to use, you need to                  product's hazard class. The 1,000 pound exception
know:                                                         does not apply to these materials.

The hazard class of the materials.                            Materials with a secondary hazard of dangerous
                                                              when wet must display the DANGEROUS WHEN
The amount of hazardous materials shipped.                    WET placard in addition to any other placards
                                                              needed by the product's hazard class. The 1,000-
The total weight of all classes of hazardous                  pound exception to placarding does not apply to
materials in your vehicle.                                    these materials.

9.3.11 ­ Placard Tables                                                         Placard Table 2
                                                                            1,001 Pounds Or More
There are two placard tables, Table 1 and Table 2.
Table 1 materials must be placarded whenever any              Category of Material (Hazard        Placard Name
amount is transported. See Figure 9.7.                        class or division number and
                                                                                             Explosives 1.4
Except for bulk packaging, the hazard classes in                 additional description, as  Explosives 1.5
Table 2 need placards only if the total amount                           appropriate)        Explosives 1.6
transported is 1,001 pounds or more including the                                            Flammable Gas
package. Add the amounts from all shipping                    1.4 Minor Explosion            Non-Flammable Gas.
papers for all the Table 2 products you have on               1.5 Very Insensitive           Flammable
board. See Figure 9.8.                                        1.6 Extremely Insensitive      Combustible*
                                                              2.1 Flammable Gases            Flammable Solid
             Placard Table 1                                  2.2 Non- Flammable Gases       Spontaneously
               Any Amount                                     3 Flammable Liquids            Combustible
                                                              Combustible Liquid             Oxidizer
      IF YOUR VEHICLE           PLACARD AS...                 4.1 Flammable Solids
 CONTAINS ANY AMOUNT                                          4.2 Spontaneously
                             Explosives 1.1                   Combustible
              OF......       Explosives 1.2                   5.1 Oxidizers
                             Explosives 1.3
1.1 Mass Explosives          Poison Gas                       5.2 (other than organic        Organic Peroxide
1.2 Project Hazards          Dangerous When                   peroxide, Type B, liquid or
1.3 Mass Fire Hazards        Wet                              solid, Temperature
2.3 Poisonous/Toxic Gases                                     Controlled)

4.3 Dangerous When Wet

5.2 (Organic Peroxide, Type  Organic Peroxide                 6.1 (other than inhalation     Poison
B, liquid or solid,                                           hazard zone A or B)
Temperature controlled)
                                                              6.2 Infectious Substances      (None)

6.1 (Inhalation hazard zone Poison/toxic                      8 Corrosives                   Corrosive

A & B only)                  inhalation                       9 Miscellaneous Hazardous      Class 9**
                                                              Materials
7 (Radioactive Yellow III
label only)                  Radioactive                      ORM-D                          (None)

             Figure 9.7                                       * FLAMMABLE may be used in place of a
                                                              COMBUSTIBLE on a cargo tank or portable tank.

You may use DANGEROUS placards instead of                     ** Class 9 Placard is not required for domestic
separate placards for each Table 2 hazard class               transportation.
when:
                                                                                       Figure 9.8
Section 9 - Hazardous Material
Version: July 2017                                                                                      Page 9-9
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Placards used to identify the primary or subsidiary           Many products become more hazardous when
hazard class of a material must have the hazard               exposed to heat. Load hazardous materials away
class or division number displayed in the lower               from heat sources.
corner of the placard. Permanently affixed
subsidiary hazard placards without the hazard                 Watch for signs of leaking or damaged containers:
class number may be used as long as they stay                 LEAKS SPELL TROUBLE! Do not transport
within color specifications.                                  leaking packages. Depending on the material, you,
                                                              your truck, and others could be in danger. It is
Placards may be displayed for hazardous materials             illegal to move a vehicle with leaking hazardous
even if not required so long as the placard                   materials.
identifies the hazard of the material being
transported.                                                  Containers of hazardous materials must be braced
                                                              to prevent movement of the packages during
Bulk packaging is a single container with a                   transportation.
capacity greater than 119. A bulk package, and a
vehicle transporting a bulk package, must be                  No Smoking. When loading or unloading
placarded, even if it only has the residue of a               hazardous materials, keep fire away. Don't let
hazardous material. Certain bulk packages only                people smoke nearby. Never smoke around:
have to be placarded on the two opposite sides or
may display labels. All other bulk packages must              Class 1 (Explosives)
be placarded on all four sides.
                                                              Class 2.1 (Flammable Gas )
    Subsections 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3
         Test Your Knowledge                                  Class 3 (Flammable Liquids)

1.  Shippers package in order to (fill in the                 Class 4 (Flammable Solids)

    blank) the material.                                      Class 5 (Oxidizers)

2.  Driver placard their vehicle to (fill in the              Secure Against Movement. Brace containers so
                                                              they will not fall, slide, or bounce around during
    blank) the risk.                                          transportation. Be very careful when loading
                                                              containers that have valves or other fittings. All
3.  What three things do you need to know to                  hazardous materials packages must be secured
                                                              during transportation.
    decide which placards (if any) you need?
                                                              After loading, do not open any package during
4.  A hazardous materials identification                      your trip. Never transfer hazardous materials from
                                                              one package to another while in transit. You may
    number must appear on the (fill in the                    empty a cargo tank, but do not empty any other
                                                              package while it is on the vehicle.
    blank) and on the (fill in the blank). The
                                                              Cargo Heater Rules. There are special cargo
    identification number must also appear on                 heater rules for loading:

    cargo tanks and other bulk packaging.                     Class 1 (Explosives)

5.  Where must you keep shipping papers                       Class 2.1 (Flammable Gas )

    describing hazardous materials?                           Class 3 (Flammable Liquids)

These questions may be on your test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsections 9.1, 9.2 and
9.3.

9.4 ­ Loading and Unloading                                   The rules usually forbid use of cargo heaters,
                                                              including automatic cargo heater/air conditioner
Do all you can to protect containers of hazardous             units. Unless you have read all the related rules,
materials. Don't use any tools, which might                   don't load the above products in a cargo space that
damage containers or other packaging during                   has a heater.
loading. Don't use hooks.
                                                              Use Closed Cargo Space. You cannot have
9.4.1 ­ General Loading Requirements                          overhang or tailgate loads of:

Before loading or unloading, set the parking brake.           Class 1 (Explosives)
Make sure the vehicle will not move.
                                                              Class 4 (Flammable Solids)
Section 9 - Hazardous Material
Version: July 2017                                            Class 5 (Oxidizers)

                                                                                                                                    Page 9-10
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

You must load these hazardous materials into a                Class 4 and 5 materials must be completely
closed cargo space unless all packages are:                   enclosed in a vehicle or covered securely. Class 4
                                                              and 5 materials, which become unstable and
Fire and water resistant.                                     dangerous when wet, must be kept dry while in
                                                              transit and during loading and unloading. Materials
Covered with a fire and water resistant tarp.                 that are subject to spontaneous combustion or
                                                              heating must be in vehicles with sufficient
Precautions for Specific Hazards                              ventilation.

Class 1 (Explosives) Materials. Turn your engine              Class 8 (Corrosive) Materials. If loading by hand,
off before loading or unloading any explosives.               load breakable containers of corrosive liquid one
Then check the cargo space. You must:                         by one. Keep them right side up. Do not drop or roll
                                                              the containers. Load them onto an even floor
Disable cargo heaters. Disconnect heater power                surface. Stack carboys only if the lower tiers can
sources and drain heater fuel tanks.                          bear the weight of the upper tiers safely.

Make sure there are no sharp points that might                Do not load nitric acid above any other product.
damage cargo. Look for bolts, screws, nails,
broken side panels, and broken floorboards.                   Load charged storage batteries so their liquid won't
                                                              spill. Keep them right side up. Make sure other
Use a floor lining with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3.            cargo won't fall against or short circuit them.
The floors must be tight and the liner must be
either non-metallic material or non-ferrous metal.            Never load corrosive liquids next to or above:
(Non-ferrous metals are any metal that does not
contain iron or iron alloys).                                 Division 1.4 (Explosives C).

Use extra care to protect explosives. Never use               Division 4.1 (Flammable Solids).
hooks or other metal tools. Never drop, throw, or
roll packages. Protect explosive packages from                Division 4.3 (Dangerous When Wet).
other cargo that might cause damage.
                                                              Class 5 (Oxidizers).
Do not transfer a Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 from one
vehicle to another on a public roadway except in              Division 2.3, Zone B (Poisonous Gases).
an emergency. If safety requires an emergency
transfer, set out red warning reflectors, flags, or           Never load corrosive liquids with:
electric lanterns. You must warn others on the
road.                                                         Division 1.1 or 1.2

Never transport damaged packages of explosives.               Division 1.3
Do not take a package that shows any dampness
or oily stain.                                                Division 1.5 (Blasting Agents).

Do not transport Division 1.1 or 1.2 in vehicle               Division 2.3, Zone A (Poisonous Gases).
combinations if:
                                                              Division 4.2 (Spontaneously Combustible
There is a marked or placarded cargo tank in the              Materials).
combination.
                                                              Division 6.1, PGI, Zone A (Poison Liquids).
The other vehicle in the combination contains:
Division 1.1 A (Initiating Explosives).                       Class 2 (Compressed Gases) Including
Packages of Class 7 (Radioactive) materials                   Cryogenic Liquids. If your vehicle doesn't have
labeled "Yellow III."                                         racks to hold cylinders, the cargo space floor must
Division 2.3 (Poisonous Gas) Hazard zone A or B               be flat. The cylinders must be:
or Division 6.1 (Poisonous) materials Hazard zone
A.                                                            Held upright.
Hazardous materials in a portable tank, on a DOT
Spec 106A or 110A tank.                                       In racks attached to the vehicle or in boxes that will
                                                              keep them from turning over.
Class 4 (Flammable Solids) and Class 5
(Oxidizers) Materials. Class 4 materials are solids           Cylinders may be loaded in a horizontal position
that react (including fire and explosion) to water,           (lying down) if it is designed so the relief valve is in
heat, and air or even react spontaneously.                    the vapor space.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Division 2.3 (Poisonous Gas) or Division 6.1
Version: July 2017                                            (Poisonous) Materials. Never transport these

                                                                                                                                    Page 9-11
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

materials in containers with interconnections.                some examples. The regulations (the Segregation
Never load a package labeled POISON or                        Table for Hazardous Materials) name other
POISON INHALATION HAZARD in the driver's cab                  materials you must keep apart.
or sleeper or with food material for human or
animal consumption. There are special rules for                   Subsection 9.4
loading and unloading Class 2 materials in cargo
tanks. You must have special training to do this.                 Test Your Knowledge

Class 7 (Radioactive) Materials. Some packages                1.  Around which hazard classes must you
of Class 7 (Radioactive) materials bear a number
called the "transport index." The shipper labels                  never smoke?
these packages Radioactive II or Radioactive III,
and prints the package's transport index on the               2.  Which three hazard classes should not be
label. Radiation surrounds each package, passing
through all nearby packages. To deal with this                    loaded into a trailer that has a heater/air
problem, the number of packages you can load
together is controlled. Their closeness to people,                conditioner unit?
animals, and unexposed film is also controlled. The
transport index tells the degree of control needed            3.  Should the floor liner required for Division
during transportation. The total transport index of
all packages in a single vehicle must not exceed                  1.1 or 1.2 materials be stainless steel?
50.Table A to this section (49 CFR 177.842) shows
rules for each transport index. It shows how close            4.  At the shipper's dock you're given a paper
you can load Class 7 (Radioactive) materials to
people, animals, or film. For example, you can't                  for 100 cartons of battery acid. You
leave a package with a transport index of 1.1
within two feet of people or cargo space walls.                   already have 100 pounds of dry Silver

                                                                  Cyanide on board. What precautions do

                                                                  you have to take?

                                                              5.  Name a hazard class that uses transport

                                                                  indexes to determine the amount that can

                                                                  be loaded in a single vehicle.

                    Do Not Load Table                         These questions may be on your test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read subsection 9.4.

Do Not Load          In The Same Vehicle With

                     Animal or human food unless the

Division 6.1 or 2.3  poison package is over packed in

(POISON or poison    an approved way. Foodstuffs are

inhalation hazard    anything you swallow. However,           9.5 ­ Bulk Packaging Marking, Loading
                                                              and Unloading
labeled material).   mouthwash, toothpaste, and skin
                                                              The glossary at the end of this section gives the
                     creams are not foodstuff.                meaning of the word bulk. Cargo tanks are bulk
                                                              packaging permanently attached to a vehicle.
                     Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Explosives,       Cargo tanks remain on the vehicle when you load
                                                              and unload them. Portable tanks are bulk
                     Division 5.1 (Oxidizers), Class 3        packaging, which are not permanently attached to
                                                              a vehicle. The product is loaded or unloaded while
Division 2.3         (Flammable Liquids), Class 8             the portable tanks are off the vehicle. Portable
                                                              tanks are then put on a vehicle for transportation.
(Poisonous) gas Zone (Corrosive Liquids), Division 5.2        There are many types of cargo tanks in use. The
                                                              most common cargo tanks are MC306 for liquids
A or Division 6.1    (Organic Peroxides),                     and MC331 for gases.

(Poison) liquids, PGI, Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Explosives,     9.5.1 ­ Markings

Zone A.              Division 1.5 (Blasting Agents),          You must display the identification number of the
                                                              hazardous materials in portable tanks and cargo
                     Division 2.1 (Flammable Gases),          tanks and other bulk packaging (such as dump
                                                              trucks). Identification numbers are in column 4 of
                     Class 4 (Flammable Solids).              the Hazardous Materials Table. The rules require
                                                              black 100 mm (3.9 inch) numbers on orange
Charged storage      Division 1.1.                            panels, placards, or a white, diamond-shaped
batteries.                                                    background if no placards are required.

Class 1 (Detonating  Any other explosives unless in                                                                                 Page 9-12
primers).            authorized containers or
                     packages.

                     Acids, corrosive materials, or other

                     acidic materials which could

Division 6.1         release hydrocyanic acid.

(Cyanides or cyanide For Example:

mixtures).           Cyanides, Inorganic, n.o.s.

                     Silver Cyanide

                     Sodium Cyanide.

                     Other materials unless the nitric

Nitric acid (Class 8). acid is not loaded above any other

                     material.

                     Figure 9.9

Mixed loads. The rules require some products to
be loaded separately. You cannot load them
together in the same cargo space. Figure 9.9 lists

Section 9 - Hazardous Material
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Specification cargo tanks must show re-test date              hole, and maintain the ground until after closing
markings.                                                     the filling hole.

Portable tanks must also show the lessee or                   9.5.4 ­ Compressed Gas
owner's name. They must also display the shipping
name of the contents on two opposing sides. The               Keep liquid discharge valves on a compressed gas
letters of the shipping name must be at least two             tank closed except when loading and unloading.
inches tall on portable tanks with capacities of              Unless your engine runs a pump for product
more than 1,000 gallons and one-inch tall on                  transfer, turn it off when loading or unloading. If
portable tanks with capacities of less than 1,000             you use the engine, turn it off after product
gallons. The identification number must appear on             transfer, before you unhook the hose. Unhook all
each side and each end of a portable tank or other            loading/unloading connections before coupling,
bulk packaging that hold 1,000 gallons or more                uncoupling, or moving a cargo tank. Always chock
and on two opposing sides, if the portable tank               trailers and semi-trailers to prevent motion when
holds less than 1,000 gallons. The identification             uncoupled from the power unit.
numbers must still be visible when the portable
tank is on the motor vehicle. If they are not visible,                         Subsection 9.5
you must display the identification number on both                         Test Your Knowledge
sides and ends of the motor vehicle.
                                                              1. What are cargo tanks?
Intermediate bulk containers (IBCs) are bulk                  2. How is a portable tank different from a cargo
packages, but are not required to have the owner's
name or shipping name.                                             tank?
                                                              3. Your engine runs a pump used during delivery
9.5.2 ­ Tank Loading
                                                                   of compressed gas. Should you turn off the
The person in charge of loading and unloading a                    engine before or after unhooking hoses after
cargo tank must be sure a qualified person is                      delivery?
always watching. This person watching the loading
or unloading must:                                            These questions may be on your test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read subsection 9.5.
Be alert.
                                                              9.6 ­ Hazardous Materials -- Driving
Have a clear view of the cargo tank.                          and Parking Rules

Be within 25 feet of the tank.                                9.6.1 ­ Parking with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3
                                                              Explosives
Know of the hazards of the materials involved.
                                                              Never park with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives
Know the procedures to follow in an emergency.                within five feet of the traveled part of the road.
                                                              Except for short periods of time needed for vehicle
Be authorized to move the cargo tank and able to              operation necessities (e.g., fueling), do not park
do so.                                                        within 300 feet of:
                                                              A bridge, tunnel, or building.
There are special attendance rules for cargo tanks            A place where people gather.
transporting propane and anhydrous ammonia.                   An open fire.
                                                              If you must park to do your job, do so only briefly.
Close all manholes and valves before moving a                 Don't park on private property unless the owner is
tank of hazardous materials, no matter how small              aware of the danger. Someone must always watch
the amount in the tank or how short the distance.             the parked vehicle. You may let someone else
Manholes and valves must be closed to prevent                 watch it for you only if your vehicle is:
leaks. It is illegal to move a cargo tank with open           On the shipper's property.
valves or covers unless it is empty according to 49           On the carrier's property.
CFR 173.29.
                                                                                                                                    Page 9-13
9.5.3 ­ Flammable Liquids

Turn off your engine before loading or unloading
any flammable liquids. Only run the engine if
needed to operate a pump. Ground a cargo tank
correctly before filling it through an open filling
hole. Ground the tank before opening the filling

Section 9 - Hazardous Material
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

On the consignee's property.                                  check with state agencies where you plan to travel.
                                                              Some localities prohibit transportation of
You are allowed to leave your vehicle unattended              hazardous materials through tunnels, over bridges,
in a safe haven. A safe haven is an approved                  or other roadways. Always check before you start.
place for parking unattended vehicles loaded with
explosives. Designation of authorized safe havens             Whenever placarded, avoid heavily populated
is usually made by local authorities.                         areas, crowds, tunnels, narrow streets, and alleys.
                                                              Take other routes, even if inconvenient, unless
9.6.2 ­ Parking a Placarded Vehicle Not                       there is no other way. Never drive a placarded
Transporting Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3)                       vehicle near open fires unless you can safely pass
Explosives                                                    without stopping.

You may park a placarded vehicle (not laden with              If transporting Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives,
explosives) within five feet of the traveled part of          you must have a written route plan and follow that
the road only if your work requires it. Do so only            plan. Carriers prepare the route plan in advance
briefly. Someone must always watch the vehicle                and give the driver a copy. You may plan the route
when parked on a public roadway or shoulder. Do               yourself if you pick up the explosives at a location
not uncouple a trailer and leave it with hazardous            other than your employer's terminal. Write out the
materials on a public street. Do not park within 300          plan in advance. Keep a copy of it with you while
feet of an open fire.                                         transporting the explosives. Deliver shipments of
                                                              explosives only to authorized persons or leave
9.6.3 ­ Attending Parked Vehicles                             them in locked rooms designed for explosives
                                                              storage.
The person attending a placarded vehicle must:
                                                              A carrier must choose the safest route to transport
Be in the vehicle, awake, and not in the sleeper              placarded radioactive materials. After choosing the
berth, or within 100 feet of the vehicle and have it          route, the carrier must tell the driver about the
within clear view.                                            radioactive materials, and show the route plan.

Be aware of the hazards of the materials being                9.6.6 ­ No Smoking
transported.
                                                              Do not smoke within 25 feet of a placarded cargo
Know what to do in emergencies.                               tank used for Class 3 (flammable liquids) or
                                                              Division 2.1 (gases). Also, do not smoke or carry a
Be able to move the vehicle, if needed.                       lighted cigarette, cigar, or pipe within 25 feet of any
                                                              vehicle, which contains:
9.6.4 ­ No Flares!
                                                              Class 1 (Explosives)
You might break down and have to use stopped
vehicle signals. Use reflective triangles or red              Class 3 (Flammable Liquids)
electric lights. Never use burning signals, such as
flares or fuses, around a:                                    Class 4.1 (Flammable Solids)

Tank used for Class 3 (Flammable Liquids) or                  Class 4.2 (Spontaneously Combustible)
Division 2.1 (Flammable Gas) whether loaded or
empty.                                                        Class 5 (Oxidizers)

Vehicle loaded with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3                 9.6.7 ­ Refuel with Engine Off
Explosives.

9.6.5 ­ Route Restrictions                                    Turn off your engine before fueling a motor vehicle
                                                              containing hazardous materials. Someone must
Some states and counties require permits to                   always be at the nozzle, controlling fuel flow.
transport hazardous materials or wastes. They
may limit the routes you can use. Local rules about           9.6.8 ­ 10 B C Fire Extinguisher
routes and permits change often. It is your job as
driver to find out if you need permits or must use            The power unit of placarded vehicles must have a
special routes. Make sure you have all needed                 fire extinguisher with a UL rating of 10 B:C or
papers before starting.                                       more.

If you work for a carrier, ask your dispatcher about          9.6.9 ­ Check Tires
route restrictions or permits. If you are an
independent trucker and are planning a new route,             Make sure your tires are properly inflated.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-14
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

You must examine each tire on a motor vehicle at              Written route plan.
the beginning of each trip and each time the
vehicle is parked.                                            A copy of FMCSR, Part 397.

The only acceptable way to check tire pressure is             9.6.11 ­ Equipment for Chlorine
to use a tire pressure gauge.
                                                              A driver transporting chlorine in cargo tanks must
Do not drive with a tire that is leaking or flat except       have an approved gas mask in the vehicle. The
to the nearest safe place to fix it. Remove any               driver must also have an emergency kit for
overheated tire. Place it a safe distance from your           controlling leaks in dome cover plate fittings on the
vehicle. Don't drive until you correct the cause of           cargo tank.
the overheating. Remember to follow the rules
about parking and attending placarded vehicles.               9.6.12 ­ Stop before Railroad Crossings
They apply even when checking, repairing, or
replacing tires.                                              Stop before a railroad crossing if your vehicle:

9.6.10 ­ Where to Keep Shipping Papers and                    Is placarded.
Emergency Response Information
                                                              Carries any amount of chlorine.
Do not accept a hazardous materials shipment
without a properly prepared shipping paper. A                 Has cargo tanks, whether loaded or empty used for
shipping paper for hazardous materials must                   hazardous materials.
always be easily recognized. Other people must be
able to find it quickly after a crash.                        You must stop 15 to 50 feet before the nearest rail.
                                                              Proceed only when you are sure no train is coming
Clearly distinguish hazardous materials shipping              and you can clear the tracks without stopping.
papers from others by tabbing them or keeping                 Don't shift gears while crossing the tracks.
them on top of the stack of papers.
                                                              9.7 ­ Hazardous Materials -
When you are behind the wheel, keep shipping                  Emergencies
papers within your reach (with your seat belt on),
or in a pouch on the driver's door. They must be              9.7.1 ­ Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG)
easily seen by someone entering the cab.
                                                              The Department of Transportation has a
When not behind the wheel, leave shipping papers              guidebook for firefighters, police, and industry
in the driver's door pouch or on the driver's seat.           workers on how to protect themselves and the
                                                              public from hazardous materials. The guide is
Emergency response information must be kept in                indexed by proper shipping name and hazardous
the same location as the shipping paper.                      materials identification number. Emergency
                                                              personnel look for these things on the shipping
Papers for Division 1.1, 1.2 or, 1.3 Explosives.              paper. That is why it is vital that the proper
                                                              shipping name, identification number, label, and
A carrier must give each driver transporting                  placards are correct.
Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives a copy of
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations                      9.7.2 ­ Crashes/Incidents
(FMCSR), Part 397. The carrier must also give
written instructions on what to do if delayed or in           As a professional driver, your job at the scene of a
an accident. The written instructions must include:           crash or an incident is to:

The names and telephone numbers of people to                  Keep people away from the scene.
contact (including carrier agents or shippers).
                                                              Limit the spread of material, only if you can safely
The nature of the explosives transported.                     do so.

The precautions to take in emergencies such as                Communicate the danger of the hazardous
fires, accidents, or leaks.                                   materials to emergency response personnel.

Drivers must sign a receipt for these documents.              Provide emergency responders with the shipping
                                                              papers and emergency response information.
You must be familiar with, and have in your
possession while driving, the:                                Follow this checklist:

Shipping papers.                                              Check to see that your driving partner is OK.

Written emergency instructions.                               Keep shipping papers with you.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                                                                                      Page 9-15
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Keep people far away and upwind.                              When sending someone for help, give that person:

Warn others of the danger.                                    A description of the emergency.

Call for help.                                                Your exact location and direction of travel.

Follow your employer's instructions.                          Your name, the carrier's name, and the name of
                                                              the community or city where your terminal is
9.7.3 ­ Fires                                                 located.

You might have to control minor truck fires on the            The proper shipping name, hazard class, and
road. However, unless you have the training and               identification number of the hazardous materials, if
equipment to do so safely, don't fight hazardous              you know them.
materials fires. Dealing with hazardous materials
fires requires special training and protective gear.          This is a lot for someone to remember. It is a good
                                                              idea to write it all down for the person you send for
When you discover a fire, call for help. You may              help. The emergency response team must know
use the fire extinguisher to keep minor truck fires           these things to find you and to handle the
from spreading to cargo before firefighters arrive.           emergency. They may have to travel miles to get to
Feel trailer doors to see if they are hot before              you. This information will help them to bring the
opening them. If hot, you may have a cargo fire               right equipment the first time, without having to go
and should not open the doors. Opening doors lets             back for it.
air in and may make the fire flare up. Without air,
many fires only smolder until firemen arrive, doing           Never move your vehicle, if doing so will cause
less damage. If your cargo is already on fire, it is          contamination or damage the vehicle. Keep
not safe to fight the fire. Keep the shipping papers          upwind and away from roadside rests, truck stops,
with you to give to emergency personnel as soon               cafes, and businesses. Never try to repack leaking
as they arrive. Warn other people of the danger               containers. Unless you have the training and
and keep them away.                                           equipment to repair leaks safely, don't try it. Call
                                                              your dispatcher or supervisor for instructions and, if
If you discover a cargo leak, identify the hazardous          needed, emergency personnel.
materials leaking by using shipping papers, labels,
or package location. Do not touch any leaking                 9.7.4 ­ Responses to Specific Hazards
material--many people injure themselves by
touching hazardous materials. Do not try to identify          Class 1 (Explosives). If your vehicle has a
the material or find the source of a leak by smell.           breakdown or accident while carrying explosives,
Toxic gases can destroy your sense of smell and               warn others of the danger. Keep bystanders away.
can injure or kill you even if they don't smell. Never        Do not allow smoking or open fire near the vehicle.
eat, drink, or smoke around a leak or spill.                  If there is a fire, warn every one of the danger of
                                                              explosion.
If hazardous materials are spilling from your
vehicle, do not move it any more than safety                  Remove all explosives before separating vehicles
requires. You may move off the road and away                  involved in a collision. Place the explosives at least
from places where people gather, if doing so                  200 feet from the vehicles and occupied buildings.
serves safety. Only move your vehicle if you can              Stay a safe distance away.
do so without danger to yourself or others.
                                                              Class 2 (Compressed Gases). If compressed gas
Never continue driving with hazardous materials               is leaking from your vehicle, warn others of the
leaking from your vehicle in order to find a phone,           danger. Only permit those involved in removing the
truck stop, help, or similar reason. Remember, the            hazard or wreckage to get close. You must notify
carrier pays for the cleanup of contaminated                  the shipper if compressed gas is involved in any
parking lots, roadways, and drainage ditches. The             accident.
costs are enormous, so don't leave a lengthy trail
of contamination. If hazardous materials are                  Unless you are fueling machinery used in road
spilling from your vehicle:                                   construction or maintenance, do not transfer a
                                                              flammable compressed gas from one tank to
Park it.                                                      another on any public roadway.

Secure the area.                                              Class 3 (Flammable Liquids). If you are
                                                              transporting a flammable liquid and have an
Stay there.                                                   accident or your vehicle breaks down, prevent

Call for help or send someone else for help.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-16
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

bystanders from gathering. Warn people of the                 everything possible to prevent injury to yourself
danger. Keep them from smoking.                               and to others.

Never transport a leaking cargo tank farther than             9.7.5 ­ Required Notification
needed to reach a safe place. Get off the roadway
if you can do so safely. Don't transfer flammable             The National Response Center helps coordinate
liquid from one vehicle to another on a public                emergency response to chemical hazards. It is a
roadway except in an emergency.                               resource to the police and firefighters. It maintains
                                                              a 24-hour toll-free line listed below. You or your
Class 4 (Flammable Solids) and Class 5                        employer must phone when any of the following
(Oxidizing Materials). If a flammable solid or                occur as a direct result of a hazardous materials
oxidizing material spills, warn others of the fire            incident:
hazard. Do not open smoldering packages of
flammable solids. Remove them from the vehicle if             A person is killed.
you can safely do so. Also, remove unbroken
packages if it will decrease the fire hazard.                 An injured person requires hospitalization.

Class 6 (Poisonous Materials and Infectious                   Estimated property damage exceeds $50,000.
Substances). It is your job to protect yourself,
other people, and property from harm. Remember                The general public is evacuated for more than one
that many products classed as poison are also                 hour.
flammable. If you think a Division 2.3 (Poison
Gases) or Division 6.1 (Poison Materials) might be            One or more major transportation arteries or
flammable, take the added precautions needed for              facilities are closed for one hour or more.
flammable liquids or gases. Do not allow smoking,
open flame, or welding. Warn others of the hazards            Fire, breakage, spillage, or suspected radioactive
of fire, of inhaling vapors, or coming in contact with        contamination occurs.
the poison.
                                                              Fire, breakage, spillage or suspected
A vehicle involved in a leak of Division 2.3 (Poison          contamination occur involving shipment of
Gases) or Division 6.1 (Poisons) must be checked              infectious substance(s) (bacteria or toxins).
for stray poison before being used again.
                                                              The release of a marine pollutant in a quantity
If a Division 6.2 (Infectious Substances) package is          greater than 119 gallons for a liquid or 882 pounds
damaged in handling or transportation, you should             for a solid; or a situation exists of such a nature
immediately contact your supervisor. Packages                 (e.g., continuing danger to life exists at the scene
that appear to be damaged or show signs of                    of an incident) that, in the judgment of the carrier,
leakage should not be accepted.                               should be reported.

Class 7 (Radioactive Materials). If radioactive               National Response Center
material is involved in a leak or broken package,             (800) 424-8802
tell your dispatcher or supervisor as soon as
possible. If there is a spill, or if an internal              Persons telephoning the National Response
container might be damaged, do not touch or                   Center should be ready to give:
inhale the material. Do not use the vehicle until it is
cleaned and checked with a survey meter.                      Their name.

Class 8 (Corrosive Materials). If corrosives spill            Name and address of the carrier they work for.
or leak during transportation, be careful to avoid
further damage or injury when handling the                    Phone number where they can be reached.
containers. Parts of the vehicle exposed to a
corrosive liquid must be thoroughly washed with               Date, time, and location of incident.
water. After unloading, wash out the interior as
soon as possible before reloading.                            The extent of injuries, if any.

If continuing to transport a leaking tank would be            Classification, name, and quantity of hazardous
unsafe, get off the road. If safe to do so, contain           materials involved, if such information is available.
any liquid leaking from the vehicle. Keep
bystanders away from the liquid and its fumes. Do             Type of incident and nature of hazardous materials
                                                              involvement and whether a continuing danger to
                                                              life exists at the scene.

                                                              If a reportable quantity of hazardous substance
                                                              was involved, the caller should give the name of
                                                              the shipper and the quantity of the hazardous
                                                              substance discharged.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-17
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Be prepared to give your employer the required                       Hazard Class Definitions
information as well. Carriers must make detailed
written reports within 30 days of an incident.                                  Table B

CHEMTREC                                                      Class  Class Name          Example
                                                              1
(800) 424-9300                                                2                          Ammunition,
                                                              3
The Chemical Transportation Emergency Center                  4      Explosives          Dynamite,
(CHEMTREC) in Washington also has a 24-hour                   5
toll-free line. CHEMTREC was created to provide               6                          Fireworks
emergency personnel with technical information                7
about the physical properties of hazardous                    8      Gases               Propane,
materials. The National Response Center and                                              Oxygen, Helium
CHEMTREC are in close communication. If you                   9
call either one, they will tell the other about the                  Flammable           Gasoline,
problem when appropriate.                                     None                       Acetone

Do not leave radioactive yellow ­ II or yellow ­ III          None   Flammable           Matches, Fuses
labeled packages near people, animals, or film                       Solids
longer than shown in figure 9.10.
                                                                                         Ammonium
               Radioactive Separation
                           Table A                                   Oxidizers           Nitrate, Hydrogen

             MINIMUM DISTANCE IN FEET TO                                                 Peroxide
             NEAREST UNDEVELOPED FILM
                                                                     Poisons             Pesticides,
                                                                                         Arsenic

                                                                     Radioactive         Uranium,
                                                                                         Plutonium

                                                                                         Hydrochloric

                                                                     Corrosives          Acid, Battery

                                                                                         Fluid

TRANSPORT                              TO PEOPLE OR CARGO            Miscellaneous       Formaldehyde,
                                          COMPARTMENT                Hazardous           Asbestos
                                              PARTITIONS             Materials

                                                                     ORM-D (Other

                                                                     Regulated           Hair Spray or

                                                                     Material-           Charcoal

TOTA L     0-2 2-4 4-8 8-12 Over 12                                  Domestic)
   INDEX   Hrs. Hrs. Hrs. Hrs. Hrs.
                                                                     Combustible         Fuel Oils, Lighter

                                                                     Liquids             Fluid

None 0        0  0              0  0   0                                      Figure 9.11

0.1 to     1  2  3              4  5   1
1.0

1.1 to     3  4  6              8  11  2                                 Subsections 9.6 and 9.7
5.0                                                                        Test Your Knowledge

5.1 to     4  6  9              11 15  3                      1. If your placarded trailer has dual tires, how
10.0                                                                  often should you check the tires?

10.1 to    5  8  12 16 22              4                      2. What is a safe haven?
20.0
                                                              3. How close to the traveled part of the
20.1 to    7  10 15 20 29              5                              roadway can you park with Division 1.2 or
30.0                                                                  1.3 materials?

30.1 to    8  11 17 22 33              6                      4. How close can you park to a bridge, tunnel,
40.0                                                                  or building with the same load?

40.1 to    9  12 19 24 36                                     5. What type of fire extinguisher must
50.0                                                                  placarded vehicles carry?

                 Figure 9.10                                  6. You're hauling 100 pounds of Division 4.3
                                                                      (dangerous when wet) materials. Do you
Classes of Hazardous Materials                                        need to stop before a railroad-highway
                                                                      crossing?
Hazardous materials are categorized into nine
major hazard classes and additional categories for            7. At a rest area you discover your hazardous
consumer commodities and combustible liquids.                         materials shipments slowly leaking from the
The classes of hazardous materials are listed in                      vehicle. There is no phone around. What
Figure 9.11.                                                          should you do?

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                                                        Page 9-18
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

8. What is the Emergency Response Guide                       Division ­ A subdivision of a hazard class.
        (ERG)?
                                                              EPA ­ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
These questions may be on your test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsections 9.6 and 9.7.             FMCSR ­ The Federal Motor Carrier Safety
                                                              Regulations.

9.8 ­ Hazardous Materials Glossary                            Freight container ­ a reusable container having a
                                                              volume of 64 cubic feet or more, designed and
This glossary presents definitions of certain terms           constructed to permit being lifted with its contents
used in this section. A complete glossary of terms            intact and intended primarily for containment of
can be found in the federal Hazardous Materials               packages (in unit form) during transportation.
Rules (49 CFR 171.8). You should have an up-to-
date copy of these rules for your reference.                  Fuel tank ­ A tank, other than a cargo tank, used
                                                              to transport flammable or combustible liquid or
(Note: You will not be tested on this glossary.)              compressed gas for the purpose of supplying fuel
                                                              for propulsion of the transport vehicle to which it is
Sec. 171.8 Definitions and abbreviations.                     attached, or for the operation of other equipment
                                                              on the transport vehicle.
Bulk packaging ­ Packaging, other than a vessel,
or a barge, including a transport vehicle or freight          Gross weight or gross mass ­ The weight of the
container, in which hazardous materials are loaded            packaging plus the weight of its contents.
with no intermediate form of containment and
which has:                                                    Hazard class ­ The category of hazard assigned
                                                              to a hazardous material under the definitional
A maximum capacity greater than 450 L (119                    criteria of Part 173 and the provisions of the Sec.
gallons) as a receptacle for a liquid;                        172.101 Table. A material may meet the defining
                                                              criteria for more than one hazard class but is
A maximum net mass greater than 400 kg (882                   assigned to only one hazard class.
pounds) or a maximum capacity greater than 450 L
(119 gallons) as a receptacle for a solid; or                 Hazardous materials ­ A substance or material
                                                              which has been determined by the Secretary of
A water capacity greater than 454 kg (1000                    Transportation to be capable of posing an
pounds) as a receptacle for a gas as defined in               unreasonable risk to health, safety, and property
Sec. 173.115.                                                 when transported in commerce, and which has
                                                              been so designated. The term includes hazardous
Cargo tank - A bulk packaging which:                          substances, hazardous wastes, marine pollutants,
                                                              elevated temperature materials and materials
Is a tank intended primarily for the carriage of              designated as hazardous in the hazardous
liquids or gases and includes appurtenances,                  materials table of §172.101, and materials that
reinforcements, fittings, and closures (for "tank",           meet the defining criteria for hazard classes and
see 49 CFR 178.345-1(c), 178.337-1, or                        divisions in §173, subchapter c of this chapter.
178.338-1, as applicable);
                                                              Hazardous substance - A material, including its
Is permanently attached to or forms a part of a               mixtures and solutions, that:
motor vehicle, or is not permanently attached to a
motor vehicle but which, by reason of its size,               Is listed in Appendix A to Sec. 172.101;
construction, or attachment to a motor vehicle is
loaded or unloaded without being removed from                 Is in a quantity, in one package, which equals or
the motor vehicle; and                                        exceeds the reportable quantity (RQ) listed in
                                                              Appendix A to Sec. 172.101; and
Is not fabricated under a specification for cylinders,
portable tanks, tank cars, or multi-unit tank car             When in a mixture or solution -
tanks.
                                                              For radionuclides, conforms to paragraph 7 of
Carrier ­ A person who transports passengers or               Appendix A to Sec. 172.101.
property in commerce by rail car, aircraft, motor
vehicle or vessel.                                            For other than radionuclides, is in a concentration
                                                              by weight which equals or exceeds the
Consignee ­ The business or person to whom a                  concentration corresponding to the RQ of the
shipment is delivered.                                        material, as shown in Figure 9.12.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                                                                                      Page 9-19
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Hazardous Substance Concentrations                            for a bag or box conforming to the applicable
                                                              requirements for specification packagings,
RQ Pounds Concentration by Weight                             including the maximum net mass limitations,
                                                              provided in subpart L of Part 178.
(Kilograms Percent              PPM

5,000      10                   100,000                       N.O.S. - Not otherwise specified.

(2,270)                         20,000                        Outage or ullage ­ The amount by which a
                                2,000                         packaging falls short of being liquid full, usually
1,000 (454) 2                   200                           expressed in percent by volume.
                                20
100 (45.4) .2

10 (4.54)  .02

1 (0.454)  .002                                               Portable tank ­ Bulk packaging (except a cylinder
                                                              having a water capacity of 1,000 pounds or less)
               Figure 9.12                                    designed primarily to be loaded onto, or on, or
                                                              temporarily attached to a transport vehicle or ship
This definition does not apply to petroleum                   and equipped with skids, mountings, or
products that are lubricants or fuels (see 40 CFR             accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by
300.6).                                                       mechanical means. It does not include a cargo
                                                              tank, tank car, multi-unit tank car tank, or trailer
Hazardous waste ­ Any material that is subject to             carrying 3AX, 3AAX, or 3T cylinders.
the Hazardous Waste Manifest Requirements of
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency                      Proper shipping name ­ The name of the
specified in 40 CFR Part 262.                                 hazardous materials shown in Roman print (not
                                                              italics) in Sec. 172.101.
Intermediate bulk container (IBC) ­ A rigid or
flexible portable packaging, other than a cylinder or         P.s.i. or psi ­ Pounds per square inch.
portable tank, which is designed for mechanical
handling. Standards for IBCs manufactured in the              P.s.i.a. or psia ­ Pounds per square inch
United States are set forth in subparts N and O               absolute.
§178.

Limited quantity ­ The maximum amount of a                    Reportable quantity (RQ) - The quantity specified
hazardous material for which there may be specific            in Column 2 of the Appendix to Sec. 172.101 for
labeling or packaging exception.                              any material identified in Column 1 of the
                                                              Appendix.

Marking ­ The descriptive name, identification                PHMSA ­ The Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
number, instructions, cautions, weight,                       Safety Administration, U.S. Department of
specification, or UN marks or combinations thereof,           Transportation, Washington, DC 20590.
required by this subchapter on outer packaging of
hazardous materials.

Mixture ­ A material composed of more than one                Shipper's certification ­ A statement on a
chemical compound or element.                                 shipping paper, signed by the shipper, saying
                                                              he/she prepared the shipment properly according
                                                              to law. For example:

Name of contents ­ The proper shipping name as                "This is to certify that the above named materials
specified in Sec. 172.101.                                    are properly classified, described, packaged,
                                                              marked and labeled, and are in proper condition
Non-bulk packaging - A packaging, which has:                  for transportation according to the applicable
                                                              regulations or the Department of Transportation.";
A maximum capacity of 450 L (119 gallons) as a                or
receptacle for a liquid;
                                                              I hereby declare that the contents of this
A maximum net mass less than 400 kg (882
pounds) and a maximum capacity of 450 L (119                  consignment are fully and accurately described
gallons) or less as a receptacle for a solid; or
                                                              above by the proper shipping name and are
A water capacity of 454 kg (1,000 pounds) or less
as a receptacle for a gas as defined in Sec.                  classified,  packaged,             marked  and
173.115.
                                                              labeled/placarded, and are in all respects in proper
Regardless of the definition of bulk packaging, a
maximum net mass of 400 kg (882 pounds) or less               condition for transport by * according to applicable

                                                              international and national government regulations."

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Shipping paper ­ A shipping order, bill of lading,
Version: July 2017                                            manifest, or other shipping document serving a

                                                                                                                                    Page 9-20
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

similar purpose prepared in accordance with
subpart C of part 172.

Technical name ­ A recognized chemical name or
microbiological name currently used in scientific
and technical handbooks, journals, and texts.

Transport vehicle ­ A cargo-carrying vehicle such
as an automobile, van, tractor, truck, semi-trailer,
tank car, or rail car used for the transportation of
cargo by any mode. Each cargo-carrying body
(trailer, rail car, etc.) is a separate transport
vehicle.

UN standard packaging ­ A specification
packaging conforming to the standards in the UN
recommendations.

UN ­ United Nations.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-21
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

               THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-22
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 10
      SCHOOL BUSES

This Section Covers

 Danger Zones and Use of Mirrors                                                        Figure 10.1
 Loading and Unloading
 Emergency Exit and Evacuation                                10.1.3 ­ Outside Left and Right Side Flat
 Railroad-highway Grade Crossings                             Mirrors
 Student Management
 Antilock Braking Systems                                     These mirrors are mounted at the left and right
 Special Safety Considerations                                front corners of the bus at the side or front of the
                                                              windshield. They are used to monitor traffic, check
Because state and local laws and regulations                  clearances and students on the sides and to the
regulate so much of school transportation and                 rear of the bus. There is a blind spot immediately
school bus operations, many of the procedures in              below and in front of each mirror and directly in
this section may differ from state to state. You              back of the rear bumper. The blind spot behind the
should be thoroughly familiar with the laws and               bus extends 50 to 150 feet and could extend up to
regulations in your state and local school district.          400 feet depending on the length and width of the
                                                              bus.
10.1 ­ Danger Zones and Use of Mirrors
                                                              Ensure that the mirrors are properly adjusted so
10.1.1 ­ Danger Zones                                         you can see:

The danger zone is the area on all sides of the bus           200 feet or 4 bus lengths behind the bus.
where children are in the most danger of being hit,
either by another vehicle or their own bus. The               Along the sides of the bus.
danger zones may extend as much as 30 feet from
the front bumper with the first 10 feet being the             The rear tires touching the ground.
most dangerous, 10 feet from the left and right
sides of the bus and 10 feet behind the rear                  Figure 10.2 shows how both the outside left and
bumper of the school bus. In addition, the area to            right side flat mirrors should be adjusted.
the left of the bus is always considered dangerous
because of passing cars. Figure 10.1 illustrates
these danger zones.

10.1.2 ­ Correct Mirror Adjustment

Proper adjustment and use of all mirrors is vital to
the safe operation of the school bus in order to
observe the danger zone around the bus and look
for students, traffic, and other objects in this area.
You should always check each mirror before
operating the school bus to obtain maximum
viewing area. If necessary, have the mirrors
adjusted.

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     Page 10-1
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                          Figure 10.2                                                   Figure 10.3

10.1.4 ­ Outside Left and Right Side Convex                   right side of the bus, including the service door and
Mirrors                                                       front wheel area. The mirror presents a view of
                                                              people and objects that does not accurately reflect
The convex mirrors are located below the outside              their size and distance from the bus. The driver
flat mirrors. They are used to monitor the left and           must ensure that these mirrors are properly
right sides at a wide angle. They provide a view of           adjusted.
traffic, clearances, and students at the side of the
bus. These mirrors present a view of people and               Ensure that the mirrors are properly adjusted so
objects that does not accurately reflect their size           you can see:
and distance from the bus.                                    The entire area in front of the bus from the front
                                                              bumper at ground level to a point where direct
You should position these mirrors to see:                     vision is possible. Direct vision and mirror view
                                                              vision should overlap.
The entire side of the bus up to the mirror mounts.           The right and left front tires touching the ground.
                                                              The area from the front of the bus to the service
Front of the rear tires touching the ground.                  door.
                                                              These mirrors, along with the convex and flat
At least one traffic lane on either side of the bus.          mirrors, should be viewed in a logical sequence to
                                                              ensure that a child or object is not in any of the
Figure 10.3 shows how both the outside left and               danger zones.
right side convex mirrors should be adjusted.
                                                              Figure 10.4 illustrates how the left and right side
10.1.5 ­ Outside Left and Right Side Crossover                crossover mirrors should be adjusted.
Mirrors

These mirrors are mounted on both left and right
front corners of the bus. They are used to see the
front bumper "danger zone" area directly in front of
the bus that is not visible by direct vision, and to
view the "danger zone" area to the left side and the

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     Page 10-2
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                          Figure 10.4                         of actions. It is imperative that you learn and obey
                                                              the state laws and regulations governing
10.1.6 ­ Overhead Inside Rearview Mirror                      loading/unloading operations in your state.

This mirror is mounted directly above the                     10.2.1 ­ Approaching the Stop
windshield on the driver's side area of the bus.
This mirror is used to monitor passenger activity             Each school district establishes official routes and
inside the bus. It may provide limited visibility             official school bus stops. All stops should be
directly in back of the bus if the bus is equipped            approved by the school district prior to making the
with a glass-bottomed rear emergency door. There              stop. You should never change the location of a
is a blind spot area directly behind the driver's seat        bus stop without written approval from the
as well as a large blind spot area that begins at the         appropriate school district official.
rear bumper and could extend up to 400 feet or
more behind the bus. You must use the exterior                You must use extreme caution when approaching
side mirrors to monitor traffic that approaches and           a school bus stop. You are in a very demanding
enters this area.                                             situation when entering these areas. It is critical
                                                              that you understand and follow all state and local
You should position the mirror to see:                        laws and regulations regarding approaching a
                                                              school bus stop. This would involve the proper use
The top of the rear window in the top of the mirror.          of mirrors, alternating flashing lights, and when
                                                              equipped, the moveable stop signal arm and
All of the students, including the heads of the               crossing control arm.
students right behind you.
                                                              When approaching the stop, you should:
10.2 ­ Loading and Unloading
                                                              Approach cautiously at a slow rate of speed.
More students are killed while getting on or off a
school bus each year than are killed as                       Look for pedestrians, traffic, or other objects
passengers inside of a school bus. As a result,               before, during, and after coming to a stop.
knowing what to do before, during, and after
loading or unloading students is critical. This               Continuously check all mirrors.
section will give you specific procedures to help
you avoid unsafe conditions which could result in             If the school bus is so equipped, activate
injuries and fatalities during and after loading and          alternating flashing amber warning lights at least
unloading students. You will be required to                   100 feet or approximately 5-10 seconds before the
demonstrate the procedures of off-loading                     school bus stop or in accordance with state law.
passengers during the road test.
                                                              Turn on right turn signal indicator about 100-300
The information in this section is intended to                feet or approximately 3-5 seconds before pulling
provide a broad overview, but is not a definitive set         over.

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     Continuously check mirrors to monitor the danger
Version: July 2017                                            zones for students, traffic, and other objects.

                                                              Move as far as possible to the right on the traveled
                                                              portion of the roadway.

                                                              When stopping you should:

                                                              Bring school bus to a full stop with the front
                                                              bumper at least 10 feet away from students at the
                                                              designated stop. This forces the students to walk
                                                              to the bus so you have a better view of their
                                                              movements.

                                                              Place transmission in Park, or if there is no Park
                                                              shift point, in Neutral and set the parking brake at
                                                              each stop.

                                                              Activate alternating red lights when traffic is a safe
                                                              distance from the school bus and ensure stop arm
                                                              is extended.

                                                                                                                                    Page 10-3
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Make a final check to see that all traffic has                Perform a safe stop at designated unloading areas
stopped before completely opening the door and                as described in subsection 10.2.1.
signaling students to approach.
                                                              Have the students remain seated until told to exit.
10.2.2 ­ Loading Procedures
                                                              Check all mirrors.
Perform a safe stop as described in subsection
10.2.1.                                                       Count the number of students while unloading to
                                                              confirm the location of all students before pulling
Students should wait in a designated location for             away from the stop.
the school bus, facing the bus as it approaches.
                                                              Check traffic, ahead, to the rear, and especially to
Students should board the bus only when signaled              the left side before allowing student to exit the bus.
by the driver.
                                                              Tell students to exit the bus and walk at least 10
Monitor all mirrors continuously.                             feet away from the side of the bus to a position
                                                              where the driver can plainly see all students.
Count the number of students at the bus stop and
be sure all board the bus. If possible, know names            Check all mirrors again. Make sure no students are
of students at each stop. If there is a student               around or returning to the bus.
missing, ask the other students where the student
is.                                                           If you cannot account for a student outside the
                                                              bus, secure the bus, and check around and
Have the students board the school bus slowly, in             underneath the bus.
single file, and use the handrail. The dome light
should be on while loading in the dark.                       When all students are accounted for, prepare to
                                                              leave by:
Wait until students are seated and facing forward             Closing the door.
before moving the bus.                                        Engaging transmission.
                                                              Releasing parking brake.
Check all mirrors. Make certain no one is running             Deactivate stop arm
to catch the bus.                                             Turning off alternating flashing red lights.
                                                              Turning on left turn signal.
If you cannot account for a student outside, secure           Checking all mirrors again.
the bus, take the key, and check around and                   Allowing congested traffic to disperse.
underneath the bus.
                                                              When it is safe, move the bus, enter the traffic flow
When all students are accounted for, prepare to               and continue the route.
leave by:
                                                              Turn signal off when fully in new driving lane.
Closing the door.
                                                              Note. If you have missed a student's unloading
Engaging the transmission.                                    stop, do not back up. Be sure to follow local
                                                              procedures.
Releasing the parking brake.
                                                              Additional Procedures for Students That Must
Turning off alternating flashing red lights.                  Cross the Roadway. You should understand what
                                                              students should do when exiting a school bus and
Turning on left turn signal.                                  crossing the street in front of the bus. In addition,
                                                              the school bus driver should understand that
Checking all mirrors again.                                   students might not always do what they are
                                                              supposed to do. If a student or students must cross
Allowing congested traffic to disperse.                       the roadway, they should follow these procedures:

When it is safe, move the bus to enter traffic flow           Walk approximately 10 feet away from the side of
and continue the route.                                       the school bus to a position where you can see
                                                              them.
The loading procedure is essentially the same
wherever you load students, but there are slight              Walk to a location at least 10 feet in front of the
differences. When students are loading at the                 right corner of the bumper, but still remaining away
school campus, you should:                                    from the front of the school bus.

Turn off the ignition switch.                                                                                                       Page 10-4

Remove key if leaving driver's compartment.

Position yourself to supervise loading as required
or recommended by your state or local regulations.

10.2.3 ­ Unloading Procedures on the Route

Section 10 ­ School Buses
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Stop at the right edge of the roadway. You should             Observe students as they step from bus to see that
be able to see the student's feet.                            all move promptly away from the unloading area.
When students reach the edge of the roadway,
they should:                                                  Walk through the bus and check for
                                                              hiding/sleeping students and items left by students.
Stop and look in all directions, making sure the
roadway is clear and is safe.                                 Check all mirrors. Make certain no students are
                                                              returning to the bus.
Check to see if the red flashing lights on the bus
are still flashing.                                           If you cannot account for a student outside the bus
                                                              and the bus is secure, check around and
Wait for your signal before crossing the roadway.             underneath the bus.

Upon your signal, the students should:                        When all students are accounted for, prepare to
                                                              leave by:
Cross far enough in front of the school bus to be in
your view.                                                    Closing the door.

Stop at the left edge of the school bus, stop, and            Fastening safety belt.
look again for your signal to continue to cross the
roadway.                                                      Starting engine.

Look for traffic in both directions, making sure              Engaging the transmission.
roadway is clear.
                                                              Releasing the parking brake.
Proceed across the roadway, continuing to look in
all directions.                                               Turning off alternating flashing red lights.

Note: The school bus driver should enforce any                Turning on left turn signal.
state or local regulations or recommendations
concerning student actions outside the school bus.            Checking all mirrors again.

10.2.4 ­ Unloading Procedures at School                       Allowing congested traffic to disperse.

State and local laws and regulations regarding                When it is safe, pull away from the unloading area.
unloading students at schools, particularly in
situations where such activities take place in the            10.2.5 ­ Special Dangers of Loading and
school parking lot or other location that is off the          Unloading
traveled roadway, are often different than
unloading along the school bus route. It is                   Dropped or Forgotten Objects. Always focus on
important that the school bus driver understands              students as they approach the bus and watch for
and obeys state and local laws and regulations.               any who disappear from sight.
The following procedures are meant to be general
guidelines.                                                   Students may drop an object near the bus during
                                                              loading and unloading. Stopping to pick up the
When unloading at the school you should follow                object, or returning to pick up the object may cause
these procedures:                                             the student to disappear from the driver's sight at a
                                                              very dangerous moment.
Perform a safe stop at designated unloading areas
as described in subsection 10.2.1.                            Students should be told to leave any dropped
                                                              object and move to a point of safety out of the
Secure the bus by:                                            danger zones and attempt to get the driver's
                                                              attention to retrieve the object.
Turning off the ignition switch.
                                                              Handrail Hang-ups. Students have been injured
Removing key if leaving driver's compartment.                 or killed when clothing, accessories, or even parts
                                                              of their body get caught in the handrail or door as
Have the students remain seated until told to exit.           they exited the bus. You should closely observe all
                                                              students exiting the bus to confirm that they are in
Position yourself to supervise unloading as                   a safe location prior to moving the bus.
required or recommended by your state or local
regulations.                                                  10.2.6 ­ Post-trip Inspection

Have students exit in orderly fashion.                        When your route or school activity trip is finished,
                                                              you should conduct a post-trip inspection of the
Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     bus.
Version: July 2017
                                                                                                                                    Page 10-5
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

You should walk through the bus and around the                Would removing students expose them to
bus looking for the following:                                speeding traffic, severe weather, or a dangerous
                                                              environment such as downed power lines?
Articles left on the bus.
                                                              Would moving students complicate injuries such as
Sleeping students.                                            neck and back injuries and fractures?

Open windows and doors.                                       Is there a hazardous spill involved? Sometimes, it
                                                              may be safer to remain on the bus and not come in
Mechanical/operational problems with the bus, with            contact with the material.
special attention to items that are unique to school
buses ­ mirror systems, flashing warning lamps                Mandatory Evacuations. The driver must
and stop signal arms.                                         evacuate the bus when:

Damage or vandalism.                                          The bus is on fire or there is a threat of a fire.

Any problems or special situations should be                  The bus is stalled on or adjacent to a railroad-
reported immediately to your supervisor or school             highway crossing.
authorities.
                                                              The position of the bus may change and increase
10.3 ­ Emergency Exit and Evacuation                          the danger.

An emergency situation can happen to anyone,                  There is an imminent danger of collision.
anytime, anywhere. It could be a crash, a stalled
school bus on a railroad-highway crossing or in a             There is a need to quickly evacuate because of a
high-speed intersection, an electrical fire in the            hazardous materials spill.
engine compartment, a medical emergency to a
student on the school bus, etc. Knowing what to do            10.3.2 ­ Evacuation Procedures
in an emergency­before, during and after an
evacuation­can mean the difference between life               Be Prepared and Plan Ahead. When possible,
and death.                                                    assign two responsible, older student assistants to
                                                              each emergency exit. Teach them how to assist
10.3.1 ­ Planning for Emergencies                             the other students off the bus. Assign another
                                                              student assistant to lead the students to a "safe
Determine Need to Evacuate Bus. The first and                 place" after evacuation. However, you must
most important consideration is for you to                    recognize that there may not be older, responsible
recognize the hazard. If time permits, school bus             students on the bus at the time of the emergency.
drivers should contact their dispatcher to explain            Therefore, emergency evacuation procedures must
the situation before making a decision to evacuate            be explained to all students. This includes knowing
the school bus.                                               how to operate the various emergency exits and
                                                              the importance of listening to and following all
As a general rule, student safety and control is              instructions given by you.
best maintained by keeping students on the bus
during an emergency and/or impending crisis                   Some tips to determine a safe place:
situation, if so doing does not expose them to
unnecessary risk or injury. Remember, the                     A safe place will be at least 100 feet off the road in
decision to evacuate the bus must be a timely one.            the direction of oncoming traffic. This will keep the
                                                              students from being hit by debris if another vehicle
A decision to evacuate should include                         collides with the bus.
consideration of the following conditions:
                                                              Lead students upwind of the bus if fire is present.
Is there a fire or danger of fire?
                                                              Lead students as far away from railroad tracks as
Is there a smell of raw or leaking fuel?                      possible and in the direction of any oncoming train.

Is there a chance the bus could be hit by other               Lead students upwind of the bus at least 300 feet if
vehicles?                                                     there is a risk from spilled hazardous materials.

Is the bus in the path of a sighted tornado or rising         If the bus is in the direct path of a sighted tornado
waters?                                                       and evacuation is ordered, escort students to a
                                                              nearby ditch or culvert if shelter in a building is not
Are there downed power lines?                                 readily available, and direct them to lie face down,
                                                              hands covering their head. They should be far
Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     enough away so the bus cannot topple on them.
Version: July 2017
                                                              Avoid areas that are subject to flash floods.

                                                                                                                                    Page 10-6
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

General Procedures. Determine if evacuation is in             rests entirely in your hands. Passive crossings
the best interest of safety.                                  require you to recognize the crossing, search for
                                                              any train using the tracks and decide if there is
Determine the best type of evacuation:                        sufficient clear space to cross safely. Passive
Front, rear or side door evacuation, or some                  crossings have yellow circular advance warning
combination of doors.                                         signs, pavement markings and cross-bucks to
Roof or window evacuation.                                    assist you in recognizing a crossing.
                                                              Active Crossings. This type of crossing has a
Secure the bus by:                                            traffic control device installed at the crossing to
                                                              regulate traffic at the crossing. These active
Placing transmission in Park, or if there is no shift         devices include flashing red lights, with or without
point, in Neutral.                                            bells and flashing red lights with bells and gates.

Setting parking brakes.                                       10.4.2 ­ Warning Signs and Devices
                                                              Advance Warning Signs. The round, black-on-
Shutting off the engine.                                      yellow warning sign is placed ahead of a public
                                                              railroad-highway crossing. The advance warning
Removing ignition key.                                        sign tells you to slow down, look and listen for the
                                                              train, and be prepared to stop at the tracks if a train
Activating hazard-warning lights.                             is coming. See Figure 10.5.

If time allows, notify dispatch office of evacuation                                    Figure 10.5
location, conditions, and type of assistance                  Pavement Markings. Pavement markings mean
needed.                                                       the same as the advance warning sign. They
                                                              consist of an "X" with the letters ""RR" and a no-
Dangle radio microphone or telephone out of                   passing marking on two-lane roads.
driver's window for later use, if operable.                   There is also a no passing zone sign on two-lane
                                                              roads. There may be a white stop line painted on
If no radio, or radio is inoperable, dispatch a               the pavement before the railroad tracks. The front
passing motorist or area resident to call for help.           of the school bus must remain behind this line
As a last resort, dispatch two older, responsible             while stopped at the crossing. See Figure 10.6.
students to go for help.
                                                                                                                                    Page 10-7
Order the evacuation.

Evacuate students from the bus.

Do not move a student you believe may have
suffered a neck or spinal injury unless his or her
life is in immediate danger.

Special procedures must be used to move neck
spinal injury victims to prevent further injury.

Direct a student assistant to lead students to the
nearest safe place.

Walk through the bus to ensure no students remain
on the bus. Retrieve emergency equipment.

Join waiting students. Account for all students and
check for their safety.

Protect the scene. Set out emergency warning
devices as necessary and appropriate.

Prepare information for emergency responders.

10.4 ­ Railroad-highway Crossings

10.4.1 ­ Types of Crossings

Passive Crossings. This type of crossing does
not have any type of traffic control device. You
must stop at these crossings and follow proper
procedures. However, the decision to proceed

Section 10 ­ School Buses
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                                                               across the road lane. Remain stopped until the
                                                                               gates go up and the lights have stopped flashing.
                                                                               Proceed when it is safe. If the gate stays down
                                                                               after the train passes, do not drive around the
                                                                               gate. Instead, call your dispatcher. See Figure
                                                                               10.8.

                          Figure 10.6

Cross-buck Signs. This sign marks the crossing.
It requires you to yield the right-of-way to the train.
If there is no white line painted on the pavement,
you must stop the bus before the cross-buck sign.
When the road crosses over more than one set of
tracks, a sign below the cross-buck indicates the
number of tracks. See Figure 10.7.

                          Figure 10.7                                              Figure 10.8

Flashing Red Light Signals. At many highway-rail         10.4.3 ­ Recommended Procedures
grade crossings, the cross-buck sign has flashing        Each state has laws and regulations governing
red lights and bells. When the lights begin to flash,    how school buses must operate at railroad-
stop! A train is approaching. You are required to        highway crossings. It is important for you to
yield the right-of-way to the train. If there is more    understand and obey these state laws and
than one track, make sure all tracks are clear           regulations. In general, school buses must stop at
before crossing. See Figure 10.8.                        all crossings, and ensure it is safe before
                                                         proceeding across the tracks. The specific
Gates. Many railroad-highway crossings have              procedures required in each state vary.
gates with flashing red lights and bells. Stop when
the lights begin to flash and before the gate lowers     A school bus is one of the safest vehicles on the
                                                         highway. However, a school bus does not have the
Section 10 ­ School Buses                                slightest edge when involved in a crash with a
Version: July 2017                                       train. Because of a train's size and weight it cannot
                                                         stop quickly. An emergency escape route does not
                                                         exist for a train. You can prevent school bus/train
                                                         crashes by following these recommended
                                                         procedures.

                                                         Approaching the Crossing:

                                                               Slow down, including shifting to a lower
                                                                   gear in a manual transmission bus, and
                                                                   test your brakes.

                                                                                                                               Page 10-8
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

      Activate hazard lights approximately 200                at "passive" crossings. Even if there are active
          feet before the crossing. Make sure your            railroad signals that indicate the tracks are clear,
          intentions are known.                               you must look and listen to be sure it is safe to
                                                              proceed.
      Scan your surroundings and check for
          traffic behind you.                                 Containment or Storage Areas. If it won't fit,
                                                              don't commit! Know the length of your bus and the
      Stay to the right of the roadway if possible.           size of the containment area at highway-rail
      Choose an escape route in the event of a                crossings on the school bus route, as well as any
                                                              crossing you encounter in the course of a school
          brake failure or problems behind you.               activity trip. When approaching a crossing with a
                                                              signal or stop sign on the opposite side, pay
At the Crossing:                                              attention to the amount of room there. Be certain
                                                              the bus has enough containment or storage area
      Stop no closer than 15 feet and no farther              to completely clear the railroad tracks on the other
          than 50 feet from the nearest rail, where           side if there is a need to stop. As a general rule,
          you have the best view of the tracks.               add 15 feet to the length of the school bus to
                                                              determine an acceptable amount of containment or
      Place the transmission in Park, or if there             storage area.
          is no Park shift point, in Neutral and press
          down on the service brake or set the                10.5 ­ Student Management
          parking brakes.
                                                              10.5.1 ­ Don't Deal with On-bus Problems
      Turn off all radios and noisy equipment,                When Loading and Unloading
          and silence the passengers.
                                                              In order to get students to and from school safely
      Open the service door and driver's                      and on time, you need to be able to concentrate on
          window. Look and listen for an                      the driving task.
          approaching train.
                                                              Loading and unloading requires all your
Crossing the Track:                                           concentration. Don't take your eyes off what is
                                                              happening outside the bus.
      Check the crossing signals again before
          proceeding.                                         If there is a behavior problem on the bus, wait until
                                                              the students unloading are safely off the bus and
      At a multiple-track crossing, stop only                 have moved away. If necessary, pull the bus over
          before the first set of tracks. When you are        to handle the problem.
          sure no train is approaching on any track,
          proceed across all of the tracks until you          10.5.2 ­ Handling Serious Problems
          have completely cleared them.
                                                              Tips on handling serious problems:
      Cross the tracks in a low gear. Do not
          change gears while crossing.                        Follow your school's procedures for discipline or
                                                              refusal of rights to ride the bus.
      If the gate comes down after you have
          started across, drive through it even if it         Stop the bus. Park in a safe location off the road,
          means you will break the gate.                      perhaps a parking lot or a driveway.

10.4.4 ­ Special Situations                                   Secure the bus. Take the ignition key with you if
                                                              you leave your seat.
Bus Stalls or Trapped on Tracks. If your bus
stalls or is trapped on the tracks, get everyone out          Stand up and speak respectfully to the offender or
and off the tracks immediately. Move everyone far             offenders. Speak in a courteous manner with a firm
from the bus at an angle, which is both away from             voice. Remind the offender of the expected
the tracks and toward the train.                              behavior. Do not show anger, but do show that you
                                                              mean business.
Police Officer at the Crossing. If a police officer
is at the crossing, obey directions. If there is no           If a change of seating is needed, request that the
police officer, and you believe the signal is                 student move to a seat near you.
malfunctioning, call your dispatcher to report the
situation and ask for instructions on how to                  Never put a student off the bus except at school or
proceed.                                                      at his or her designated school bus stop. If you feel

Obstructed View of Tracks. Plan your route so it                                                                                    Page 10-9
provides maximum sight distance at highway-rail
grade crossings. Do not attempt to cross the tracks
unless you can see far enough down the track to
know for certain that no trains are approaching.
Passive crossings are those that do not have any
type of traffic control device. Be especially careful

Section 10 ­ School Buses
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

that the offense is serious enough that you cannot            Without ABS, you still have normal brake functions.
safely drive the bus, call for a school administrator         Drive and brake as you always have.
or the police to come and remove the student.
                                                              Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps
Always follow your state or local procedures for              to tell you if something is not working. The yellow
requesting assistance.                                        ABS malfunction lamp is on the bus's instrument
                                                              panel.
10.6 ­ Antilock Braking Systems
                                                              As a system check on newer vehicles, the
10.6.1 ­ Vehicles Required to Have Antilock                   malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb
Braking Systems                                               check and then goes out quickly. On older
                                                              systems, the lamp could stay on until you are
The Department of Transportation requires that                driving over five mph.
antilock braking systems be on:
                                                              If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes
Air brakes vehicles, (trucks, buses, trailers and             on once you are under way, you may have lost
converter dollies) built on or after March 1, 1998.           ABS control at one or more wheels.

Hydraulically braked trucks and buses with a gross            Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still
vehicle weight rating of 10,000 lbs or more built on          have regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the
or after March 1, 1999.                                       system serviced soon.

Many buses built before these dates have been                 10.6.5 ­ Safety Reminders
voluntarily equipped with ABS.
                                                              ABS won't allow you to drive faster, follow more
Your school bus will have a yellow ABS                        closely, or drive less carefully.
malfunction lamp on the instrument panel if it is
equipped with ABS.                                            ABS won't prevent power or turning skids ­
                                                              ABS should prevent brake-induced skids but not
10.6.2 ­ How ABS Helps You                                    those caused by spinning the drive wheels or
                                                              going too fast in a turn.
When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a
vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up.                 ABS won't necessarily shorten stopping
When your steering wheels lock up, you lose                   distance. ABS will help maintain vehicle control,
steering control. When your other wheels lock up,             but not always shorten stopping distance.
you may skid or even spin the vehicle.
                                                              ABS won't increase or decrease ultimate
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up and maintain                stopping power ­ ABS is an "add-on" to your
control. You may or may not be able to stop faster            normal brakes, not a replacement for them.
with ABS, but you should be able to steer around
an obstacle while braking, and avoid skids caused             ABS won't change the way you normally brake.
by over braking.                                              Under normal brake conditions, your vehicle will
                                                              stop as it always stopped. ABS only comes into
10.6.3 ­ Braking with ABS                                     play when a wheel would normally have locked up
                                                              because of over braking.
When you drive a vehicle with ABS, you should
brake as you always have. In other words:                     ABS won't compensate for bad brakes or poor
                                                              brake maintenance.
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely
and stay in control.                                          Remember: The best vehicle safety feature is still
                                                              a safe driver.
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you
have ABS on the bus. However, in emergency                    Remember: Drive so you never need to use your
braking, do not pump the brakes on a bus with                 ABS.
ABS.
                                                              Remember: If you need it, ABS could help to
As you slow down, monitor your bus and back off               prevent a serious crash.
the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to stay in control.
                                                              10.7 ­ Special Safety Considerations
10.6.4 ­ Braking if ABS is Not Working
                                                              10.7.1 ­ Strobe Lights

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     Page 10-10
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Some school buses are equipped with roof-                     If you must back-up at a student drop-off point, be
mounted, white strobe lights. If your bus is so               sure to unload students after backing.
equipped, the overhead strobe light should be
used when you have limited visibility. This means             10.7.4 ­ Tail Swing
that you cannot easily see around you ­ in front,
behind, or beside the school bus. Your visibility             A school bus can have up to a three-foot tail swing.
could be only slightly limited or it could be so bad          You need to check your mirrors before and during
that you can see nothing at all. In all instances,            any turning movements to monitor the tail swing.
understand and obey your state or local
regulations concerning the use of these lights.                          Section 10
                                                                  Test Your Knowledge
10.7.2 ­ Driving in High Winds
                                                              1.  Define the danger zone. How far does the
Strong winds affect the handling of the school bus!
The side of a school bus acts like a sail on a                    danger zone extend around the bus?
sailboat. Strong winds can push the school bus
sideways. They can even move the school bus off               2.  What should you be able to see if the
the road or, in extreme conditions, tip it over.
                                                                  outside flat mirrors are adjusted properly?
If you are caught in strong winds:
                                                                  The outside convex mirrors? The
Keep a strong grip on the steering wheel. Try to
anticipate gusts.                                                 crossover mirrors?

You should slow down to lessen the effect of the              3.  You are loading students along the route.
wind, or pull off the roadway and wait.
                                                                  When should you activate your alternating
Contact your dispatcher to get more information on
how to proceed.                                                   flashing amber warning lights?

10.7.3 ­ Backing                                              4.  You are unloading students along your

Backing a school bus is strongly discouraged. You                 route. Where should students walk to after
should back your bus only when you have no other
safe way to move the vehicle. You should never                    exiting the bus?
back a school bus when students are outside of
the bus. Backing is dangerous and increases your              5.  After unloading at school, why should you
risk of a collision. If you have no choice and you
must back your bus, follow these procedures:                      walk through the bus?

Post a lookout. The purpose of the lookout is to              6.  What position should students be in front
warn you about obstacles, approaching persons,
and other vehicles. The lookout should not give                   of the bus before they cross the roadway?
directions on how to back the bus.
                                                              7.  Under what conditions must you evacuate
Signal for quiet on the bus.
                                                                  the bus?
Constantly check all mirrors and rear windows.
                                                              8.  How far from the nearest rail should you
Back slowly and smoothly.
                                                                  stop at a highway-rail crossing?
If no lookout is available:
Set the parking brake.                                        9.  What is a passive highway-rail crossing?
Turn off the motor and take the keys with you.
Walk to the rear of the bus to determine whether                  Why should you be extra cautious at this
the way is clear.
                                                                  type of crossing?
If you must back-up at a student pick-up point, be
sure to pick up students before backing and watch             10. How should you use your brakes if your
for late comers at all times.
                                                                  vehicle is equipped with antilock brakes
Be sure that all students are in the bus before
backing.                                                          (ABS)?

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     These questions may be on your test. If you can't
Version: July 2017
                                                              answer them all, re-read Section 10.

                                                                                                    Page 10-11
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                     THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     Page 10-12
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 11                                         Check for adequate power steering fluid level.
       Pre-Trip Vehicle                                       Level must be above refill mark.
       Inspection Test
                                                              Engine Compartment Belts
This Section Covers
                                                              Check the following belts for snugness (1/2 to 3/4
 Internal Inspection                                          inch play at center of belt), cracks, or frays, loose
 External Inspection                                          fibers, or signs of wear:

During the pre-trip inspection, you must show that                  Power steering belt.
the vehicle is safe to drive. You will have to walk                 Water pump belt.
around the vehicle name and point to/ touch each                    Alternator belt.
item and explain to the examiner what you are                       Air compressor belt.
checking and why.
                                                              Note: If any of the components listed above are
Any vehicle that has components marked or                     not belt driven, you must:
labeled cannot be used for the Vehicle Inspection
test.                                                         Tell the examiner which component(s) are not belt
                                                              driven.

                                                              Make sure component(s) are operating properly,
                                                              are not damaged or leaking, and are mounted
                                                              securely (including any wires).

11.1 All Vehicles                                             Safe Start
                                                              Place gearshift lever in neutral (or park, for
Study the following vehicle parts for the type of             automatic transmissions).
vehicle you will be using during the CDL skills               Depress clutch before attempting to start the
tests. You should be able to identify each part and           vehicle.
tell the examiner what you are looking for or                 Start the vehicle and keep clutch depressed until
inspecting.                                                   engine reaches idling speed.
                                                              Then release clutch slowly.
11.1.1 Engine Compartment (Engine Off)
                                                              11.1.2 ­ Cab Check/Engine Start
Leaks/Hoses
Look for puddles on the ground.                               Oil Pressure Gauge
Look for dripping fluids on underside of engine and           Make sure oil pressure gauge is working.
transmission.                                                 Check that pressure gauge shows increasing or
Inspect hoses for condition and leaks.                        normal oil pressure or that the warning light goes
                                                              off.
Oil Level                                                     If equipped, oil temperature gauge should begin a
Check oil level when engine is off.                           gradual rise to the normal operating range.
Indicate where dipstick is located.
Check that oil level is within safe operating range.          Temperature Gauge
Level must be above refill mark.                              Make sure the temperature gauge is working.
                                                              Temperature should begin to climb to the normal
Coolant Level                                                 operating range or temperature light should be off.
Looks at sight glass on radiator or coolant
reservoir; adequate level will show in sight glass. If        Air Gauge
no sight glass is available, you must describe what           Check that the air gauge is working properly and
s/he would look for after removing radiator cap.              that the air compressor builds the air pressure to
                                                              governor cut-out, at approximately 120-140 psi. psi
Power Steering Fluid                                          or as specified by manufacturer.
Indicate where power steering fluid dipstick is
located.                                                                                                                           Page 11-1

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Ammeter/Voltmeter                                                  Red reflectors (on rear) and amber reflectors
Check that gauges show alternator and/or                           (elsewhere).
generator is charging or that warning light is off.
                                                                   Reflector tape condition is present and affixed
Mirrors and Windshield                                             securely
Mirrors should be clean and adjusted properly from
the inside.                                                   Note: Checks of brake, turn signal and four-way
Windshield should be clean with no illegal stickers,          flasher functions must be done separately.
no obstructions, or damage to the glass.
                                                              Horn
Emergency Equipment
Check for spare electrical fuses.                             Check that air horn and/or electric horn work.
Check for three red reflective triangles, 6 fusees or
3 liquid burning flares.                                      Heater/Defroster
Check that the fire extinguisher is properly charged
and securely mounted..                                        Test that the heater and defroster work.
Note: If the vehicle is not equipped with electrical
fuses, you must mention this to the examiner.                 Parking Brake Check

Wipers/Washers                                                With air pressure built to governor cutout and the
Check that wiper arms and blades are secure, not              parking brake engaged (trailer brakes released on
damaged, and operate smoothly.                                combination vehicles), check that the parking brake
If equipped, windshield washers must operate                  will hold vehicle by gently trying to pull forward with
correctly.                                                    parking brake on.

Lights/Reflectors/Reflector Tape Condition                    With air pressure built to governor cutout, the
(Sides & Rear)                                                parking brake released and the trailer parking
Test that dash indicators work when corresponding             brake engaged (combination vehicles only), check
lights are turned on:                                         that the trailer parking brake will hold vehicle by
                                                              gently trying to pull forward with the trailer parking
     Left turn signal.                                        brake on.
     Right turn signal.
     Four-way emergency flashers.                             Hydraulic Brake Check
     High beam headlight.
     Anti-lock Braking System (ABS) indicator.                Pump the brake pedal three times, then hold it
                                                              down for five seconds. The brake pedal should not
Check that all external lights and reflective                 move (depress) during the five seconds.
equipment are clean, are functional and none are
missing or broken. Light and reflector checks                 If equipped with a hydraulic brake reserve (back-
include verification of correct color:                        up) system, with the key off, depress the brake
                                                              pedal and listen for the sound of the reserve
     Clearance lights (red on rear, amber                     system electric motor.
     elsewhere).
     Headlights (high and low beams).                         Check that the warning buzzer or light is off.
     Taillights.
     Backing lights.                                          Air Brake Check (Air Brake Equipped Vehicles
     Turn signals.                                            Only)
     Four-way flashers.
     Brake lights.                                            Failure to perform all three components of the air
                                                              brake check correctly will result in an automatic
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                               failure of the vehicle inspection test. Air brake
Version: July 2017                                            safety devices vary. However, this procedure is
                                                              designed to see that any safety device operates
                                                              correctly as air pressure drops from normal to a
                                                              low air condition. For safety purposes, in areas
                                                              where an incline is present, you will use wheel
                                                              chocks during the air brake check. The proper
                                                              procedures for inspecting the air brake system are
                                                              as follows:

                                                              1. With the air pressure built up to governor cutoff
                                                                   (120 ­ 140 psi), shut off the engine leaving the
                                                                   key in the "on" or "battery charge" position,
                                                                   chock your wheels if necessary, release the

                                                                                                                                   Page 11-2
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

     parking brake (all vehicles), and the tractor            11.2.2 ­ Suspension
     protection valve (combination vehicle) and fully         Springs/Air/Torque
     apply the foot brake. Hold the foot brake for
     one minute. Check the air gauge to see if the            Look for missing, shifted, cracked, or broken leaf
     air pressure drops more than three pounds in             springs.
     one minute (single vehicle) or four pounds in
     one minute (combination vehicle).                        Look for broken or distorted coil springs.

2. Begin fanning off the air pressure by rapidly              If vehicle is equipped with torsion bars, torque
     applying and releasing the foot brake. Low air           arms, or other types of suspension components,
     warning devices (buzzer, light, flag) should             check that they are not damaged and are mounted
     activate before air pressure drops below 55 psi          securely.
     or level specified by the manufacturer.                  Air ride suspension should be checked for damage
                                                              and leaks.
3. Continue to fan off the air pressure. At
     approximately 40 psi on a tractor-trailer                Mounts
     combination vehicle (or level specified by the
     manufacturer), the tractor protection valve and          Look for cracked or broken spring hangers,
     parking brake valve should close (pop out). On           missing or damaged bushings, and broken, loose,
     other combination vehicle types and single               or missing bolts, u-bolts or other axle mounting
     vehicle types, the parking brake valve should            parts. (The mounts should be checked at each
     close (pop out).                                         point where they are secured to the vehicle frame
                                                              and axle[s]).
Service Brake Check
                                                              Shock Absorbers
You will be required to check the application of air
or hydraulic service brakes. This procedure is                See that shock absorbers are secure and that
designed to determine that the brakes are working             there are no leaks.
correctly and that the vehicle does not pull to one
side or the other.                                            Note: Be prepared to perform the same
                                                              suspension components inspection on every axle
Pull forward at 5 mph, apply the service brake and            (power unit and trailer, if equipped).
stop. Check to see that the vehicle does not pull to
either side and that it stops when brake is applied.          11.2.3 ­ Brakes

Safety Belt                                                   Slack Adjustors and Pushrods

Check that the safety belt is securely mounted,               Look for broken, loose, or missing parts.
adjusts, latches properly and is not ripped or                For manual slack adjustors, the brake pushrod
frayed.                                                       should not move more than one inch (with the
                                                              brakes released) when pulled by hand.
11.2 ­ External Inspection (All Vehicles)
                                                              Brake Chambers
11.2.1­ Steering
                                                              See that brake chambers are not leaking, cracked,
Steering Box/Hoses                                            or dented and are mounted securely. . Make sure
                                                              there are no loose or missing clamps.
Check that the steering box is securely mounted
and not leaking. Look for any missing nuts and/or             Brake Hoses/Lines
bolts.                                                        Look for cracked, worn, or leaking hoses, lines,
                                                              and couplings.
Check for power steering fluid leaks or damage to
power steering hoses.                                         Drum Brake

Steering Linkage                                              Check for cracks, dents, or holes. Also check for
                                                              loose or missing bolts.
See that connecting links, arms, and rods from the
steering box to the wheel are not worn or cracked.            Check for contaminates such debris or oil/grease.
                                                              Brake linings (where visible) should not be worn
Check that joints and sockets are not worn or loose           dangerously thin.
and that there are no missing nuts, bolts, or cotter
keys.                                                                                                                              Page 11-3

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Brake Linings                                                 Note: Be prepared to perform the same wheel
                                                              inspection on every axle (power unit and trailer, if
On some brake drums, there are openings where                 equipped).
the brake linings can be seen from outside the
drum. For this type of drum, check that a visible             11.2.5 ­ Side of Vehicle
amount of brake lining is showing.
                                                              Door(s)/Mirror(s)
Note: Be prepared to perform the same brake
components inspection on every axle (power unit               Check that door(s) are not damaged and that they
and trailer, if equipped).                                    open and close properly from the outside.

11.2.4 ­ Wheels                                               Hinges should be secure with seals intact.

Rims                                                          Check that mirror(s) and mirror brackets are not
                                                              damaged and are mounted securely with no loose
Check for damaged or bent rims. Rims cannot                   fittings.
have welding repairs.
                                                              Fuel Tank
Check for rust trails that may indicate the rim is
loose on the wheel.                                           Check that tank(s) are secure, cap(s) are tight, and
                                                              that there are no leaks from tank(s) or lines.
Tires
The following items must be inspected on every                Drive Shaft
tire:
                                                              See that drive shaft is not bent or cracked.
Tread depth: Check for minimum tread depth
(4/32 on steering axle tires, 2/32 on all other tires).       Couplings should be secure and free of foreign
                                                              objects.
Tire condition: Check that tread is evenly worn
and look for cuts or other damage to tread or                 Exhaust System
sidewalls. Also, make sure that valve caps and
stems are not missing, broken, or damaged.                    Check system for damage and signs of leaks such
                                                              as rust or carbon soot. Exhaust system should not
Tire inflation: Check for proper inflation by using a         have cracks, holes, or severe dents.
tire gauge. Note: You will not get credit if you
simply kick the tires or use a mallet to check for            System should be connected tightly and mounted
proper inflation.                                             securely.

Hub Oil Seals/Axle Seals                                      Frame

See that hub oil/grease seals and axle seals are              Look for cracks, broken welds, holes, or other
not leaking and, if wheel has a sight glass, oil level        damage to the longitudinal frame members, cross
is adequate.                                                  members, box, and floor.

Lug Nuts                                                      11.2.6 ­ Rear of Vehicle

Check that all lug nuts are present, free of cracks           Splash Guards
and distortions, and show no signs of looseness
such as rust trails or shiny threads.                         If equipped, check that splash guards or mud flaps
                                                              are not damaged and are mounted securely.
Make sure all bolt holes are not cracked or
distorted.                                                    Doors/Ties/Lifts

Spacers or Budd Spacing                                       Check that doors and hinges are not damaged and
                                                              that they open, close, and latch properly from the
If equipped, check that spacers are not bent,                 outside, if equipped.
damaged, or rusted through; and are centered with
dual tires evenly separated.                                  Ties, straps, chains, and binders must also be
                                                              secure.
Check the space between the tires for debris
and/or foreign objects.                                       If equipped with a cargo lift, look for leaking,
                                                              damaged or missing parts and explain how it
                                                              should be checked for correct operation.

                                                              Lift must be fully retracted and latched securely.

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                               Page 11-4
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

11.2.7 ­ Tractor/Coupling                                     Release Arm (Fifth Wheel)
                                                              If equipped, make sure the release arm is in the
Air/Electric Lines                                            engaged position and the safety latch is in place.

Listen for air leaks. Check that air hoses and                Kingpin/Apron/Gap
electrical lines are not cut, chafed, spliced, or worn        Explain that locking jaws holds kingpin in place
(steel braid should not show through).                        and that the kingpin is not bent or damaged.
                                                              Make sure the visible part of the apron is not bent,
Make sure air and electrical lines are not tangled,           cracked, or broken.
pinched, or dragging against tractor parts.                   Check that the trailer is lying flat on the fifth wheel
                                                              skid plate (no gap).
Catwalk/Steps                                                 Check for kingpin lock.

Check that the catwalk is solid, clear of objects,            Locking Pins (Fifth Wheel)
and securely bolted to tractor frame.                         If equipped, look for loose or missing pins in the
                                                              slide mechanism of the sliding fifth wheel. If air
Check that steps leading to the cab entry and                 powered, check for leaks.
catwalk (if equipped) are solid, clear of objects,            Make sure locking pins are fully engaged.
and securely bolted to tractor frame.                         Check that the fifth wheel is positioned properly so
                                                              that the tractor frame will clear the landing gear
Mounting Bolts                                                during turns.

Look for loose or missing mounting brackets,                  Sliding Pintle
clamps, bolts, or nuts. Both the fifth wheel and the          Check the sliding pintle hook for excessive wear
slide mounting must be solidly attached.                      and to ensure it is secure with no loose or missing
                                                              nuts or bolts and cotter pin is in place.
Check for loose or missing mounting bolts and for
broken welds for pintle hook or other type of hitch           Tongue or Draw-bar
mount, and tongue/draw-bar assembly to ensure                 Check that the tongue/draw-bar is not bent or
that they are solidly attached in place.                      twisted and checks for broken welds and stress
                                                              cracks.
On other types of coupling systems (i.e., ball hitch,         Check that the tongue/draw-bar eye is not worn
pintle hook, etc.), inspect all coupling components           excessively.
and mounting brackets for missing or broken parts.            Tongue Storage Area
                                                              Check that the storage area is solid and secured to
Hitch Release Lever                                           the tongue.
                                                              Check that cargo in the storage area i.e. chains,
Check to see that the hitch release lever is in place         binders, etc. are secure.
and is secure.
                                                              11.3 ­ School Bus Only
Locking Jaws
                                                              Emergency Equipment
Look into fifth wheel gap and check that locking              In addition to checking for spare electrical fuses (if
jaws are fully closed around the kingpin.                     equipped), three red reflective triangles, 6 fusees
                                                              or 3 liquid burning flares and a properly charged
On other types of coupling systems (i.e., ball hitch,         and rated fire extinguisher, school bus drivers must
pintle hook, etc.), inspect the locking mechanism             also inspect the following emergency equipment:
for missing or broken parts and make sure it is
locked securely. If present, safety cables or chains               Emergency Kit
must be secure and free of kinks and excessive                     Body Fluid Cleanup Kit
slack.
                                                                                                                                   Page 11-5
5th Wheel Skid Plate
Check for proper lubrication and that 5th wheel skid
plate is securely mounted to the platform and that
all bolts and pins are secure and not missing.

Platform (Fifth Wheel)
Check for cracks or breaks in the platform structure
which supports the fifth wheel skid plate.

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Lighting Indicators                                           Hand rails are secure and the step light is working,
                                                              if equipped.
In addition to checking the lighting indicators listed        The entry steps must be clear with the treads not
in Section 10.2 of this manual, school bus drivers            loose or worn excessively.
must also check the following lighting indicators             If equipped with a handicap lift, look for leaking,
(internal panel lights):                                      damaged, or missing parts and explain how lift
                                                              should be checked for correct operation. Lift must
     Alternately flashing amber lights indicator, if          be fully retracted and latched securely.
     equipped.
                                                              Emergency Exit
     Alternately flashing red lights indicator.               Demonstrate that at least one emergency exit is
                                                              not damaged, operates smoothly, and closes
     Strobe light indicator, if equipped.                     securely from the inside.
                                                              Check that release handle can be operated
Lights/Reflectors                                             properly from both inside and outside the vehicle.
                                                              Point out and describe how all other emergency
In addition to checking the lights and reflective             exits operate.
devices listed in Section 10.2 of this manual,                Check that any emergency exit warning devices
school bus drivers must also check the following              are working.
(external) lights and reflectors:
                                                              Seating
     Strobe light, if equipped is operational and is          Look for broken seat frames and check that seat
     not broken.                                              frames are firmly attached to the floor.
                                                              Check that seat cushions are attached securely to
     Stop arm light, if equipped.                             the seat frames.

     Alternately flashing amber lights, if equipped           11.4 ­ Trailer
     are operational and not broken.
                                                              11.4.1 ­ Trailer Front
     Alternately flashing red lights, on both the front
     and back of the vehicle are operational and not          Air/Electrical Connections
     broken.                                                  Check that trailer air connectors are sealed and in
                                                              good condition.
Student Mirrors                                               Make sure glad hands are locked in place, free of
                                                              damage or air leaks.
In addition to checking the external mirrors, school          Make sure trailer electrical plug is firmly seated
bus drivers must also check the internal and                  and locked in place.
external mirrors used for observing students:
                                                              Header Board
Check for proper adjustment.                                  If equipped, check the header board to see that it
                                                              is secure, free of damage, and strong enough to
Checks that all internal and external mirrors and             contain cargo.
mirror brackets are not damaged and are mounted               If equipped, the canvas or tarp carrier must be
securely with no loose fittings.                              mounted and fastened securely.
                                                              On enclosed trailers, check the front area for signs
Checks that visibility is not impaired due to dirty           of damage such as cracks, bulges, or holes.
mirrors.
                                                              11.4.2 ­ Side of Trailer
Stop Arm/Safety Arm
                                                                                                                                   Page 11-6
If equipped, check the stop arm to see that it is
mounted securely to the frame of the vehicle. Also,
check for loose fittings and damage. Check that
stop arm extends fully when operated.

If equipped, checks that safety arm is securely
mounted and functions properly in conjunction with
stop arm.

Passenger Entry/Lift

Check that the entry door is not damaged,
operates smoothly, and closes securely from the
inside.

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Landing Gear                                                  If equipped with a handicap lift, look for any
Check that the landing gear is fully raised, has no           leaking, damaged or missing parts, and explain
missing parts, crank handle is secure, and the                how it should be checked for correct operation.
support frame and pads are not damaged.
If power operated, check for air or hydraulic leaks.          Lift should be fully retracted and latched securely.

Doors/Ties/Lifts                                              Emergency Exits
If equipped, check that doors are not damaged.
Check that doors open, close, and latch properly              Make sure that all emergency exits are not
from the outside.                                             damaged, operate smoothly, and close securely
Check that ties, straps, chains, and binders are              from the inside.
secure.
If equipped with a cargo lift, look for leaking,              Check that any emergency exit warning devices
damaged or missing parts and explain how it                   are working.
should be checked for correct operation.
Lift should be fully retracted and latched securely.          Passenger Seating

Frame                                                         Look for broken seat frames and check that seat
Look for cracks, broken welds, holes, or other                frames are firmly attached to the floor.
damage to the frame, cross members, box, and
floor.                                                        Check that seat cushions are attached securely to
                                                              the seat frames.
Tandem Release Arm/Locking Pins
If equipped, make sure the locking pins are locked            11.5.2 ­ Entry/ Exit
in place and release arm is secured.
                                                              Doors/Mirrors
11.4.3 ­ Remainder of Trailer
                                                              Check that entry/exit doors are not damaged and
Remainder of Trailer                                          operate smoothly from the outside. Hinges should
Please refer to Section 11.2 of this manual for               be secure with seals intact.
detailed inspection procedures regarding the
following components:                                         Make sure that the passenger exit mirrors and all
                                                              external mirrors and mirror brackets are not
     Wheels.                                                  damaged and are mounted securely with no loose
     Suspension system.                                       fittings.
     Brakes.
     Doors/ties/lift.                                         11.5.3 ­ External Inspection of Coach/ Transit
     Splash guards.                                           Bus

                                                              Level/Air Leaks

                                                              See that the vehicle is sitting level (front and rear),
                                                              and if air-equipped, check for audible air leaks from
                                                              the suspension system.

                                                              Fuel Tank(s)

                                                              See that fuel tank(s) are secure with no leaks from
                                                              tank(s) or lines.

11.5 ­ Coach/Transit Bus                                      Baggage Compartments

11.5.1 ­ Passenger Items                                      Check that baggage and all other exterior
Passenger Entry/Lift                                          compartment doors are not damaged, operate
                                                              properly, and latch securely.
Check that entry doors operate smoothly and close
securely from the inside.                                     Battery/Box
Check that hand rails are secure and, if equipped,
that the step light(s) are working.                           Wherever located, see that battery(s) are secure,
Check that the entry steps are clear, with the                connections are tight, and cell caps are present.
treads not loose or worn excessively.
                                                              Battery connections should not show signs of
                                                              excessive corrosion.

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                               Page 11-7
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System  Page 11-8

Check that battery box and cover or door is not
damaged and is secure.

11.5.4 ­ Remainder of Coach/ Transit Bus
Remainder of Vehicle
Please refer to Section 11.2 of this manual for
detailed inspection procedures for the remainder of
the vehicle.

Remember, the Vehicle Inspection must be
passed before you can proceed to the Basic
Control Skills test.

11.6 ­ Taking the CDL Vehicle
Inspection Test

11.6.1 ­ Class A Vehicle Inspection Test
If you are applying for a Class A CDL, you will be
required to perform one of the four versions of a
Vehicle inspection in the vehicle you have brought
with you for testing. Each of the four tests are
equivalent and you will not know which test you will
take until just before the testing begins.

All of the tests include an engine start, an in-cab-
inspection, and an inspection of the coupling
system. Then, your test may require an inspection
of the entire vehicle or only a portion of the vehicle
which your CDL Examiner will explain to you.

11.6.2 ­ Class B and C Vehicle Inspection Test

If you are applying for a Class B CDL, you will be
required to perform one of the three versions of a
Vehicle inspection in the vehicle you have brought
with you for testing. Each of the three tests are
equivalent and you will not know which test you will
take until just before the testing begins.

All of the tests include an engine start and an
in-cab inspection. Then, your test may require an
inspection of the entire vehicle or only a portion of
the vehicle which your CDL Examiner will explain
to you. You will also have to inspect any special
features of your vehicle (e.g, school or transit bus).

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                               Page 11-9
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                        THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                               Page 11-10
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 12                                         bus, maintain a firm grasp on the handrail at all
   Basic Vehicle Control                                      times). If you do not safely secure the vehicle or
                                                              safely exit the vehicle it may result in an automatic
           Skills Test                                        failure of the basic control skills test.

This Section Covers                                           The maximum number of times that you may look
                                                              to check the position of you vehicle is two (2)
 Skills Test Scoring                                          except for the Straight Line Backing exercise,
 Skills Test Exercises                                        which allows one look. Each time you open the
                                                              door, move from a seated position where in
Your basic control skills could be tested using one           physical control of the vehicle or on a bus walk to
or more of the following exercises off-road or                the back of a bus to get a better view, it is scored
somewhere on the street during the road test:                 as a "look".

Straight line backing.                                        Final Position/Inside Parallel ­ It is important that
                                                              you finish each exercise exactly as the examiner
Offset back/right                                             has instructed you. If you do not maneuver the
                                                              vehicle into its final position as described by the
Offset back/left                                              examiner, you will be penalized and could fail the
                                                              basic skills test.
Parallel park (driver side).
                                                              12.2 Exercises
Parallel park (conventional).
                                                              12.2.1 ­ Straight Line Backing
Alley dock.
                                                              You may be asked to back your vehicle in a
These exercises are shown in Figures 12-1                     straight line between two rows of cones without
through 12-6.                                                 touching or crossing over the exercise boundaries.
                                                              (See Figure 12.1.)
12.1 Scoring
                                                              12.2.2 ­ Offset Back/Right
Crossing Boundaries (encroachments)
                                                              You may be asked to back into a space that is to
Pull-ups                                                      the right rear of your vehicle. You will drive straight
                                                              forward to the outer boundary. From that position
Outside Vehicle Observations (looks)                          you must back the vehicle into the opposite lane
                                                              until the front of your vehicle has passed the first
Final Position/Inside Parallel                                set of cones without striking boundary lines or
                                                              cones. (See Figure 12.2)
Encroachments ­ The examiner will score the
number of times you touch or cross over an                    12.2.3 ­ Offset Back/Left
exercise boundary line or cone with any portion of
your vehicle. Each encroachment will count as an              You may be asked to back into a space that is to
error.                                                        the left rear of your vehicle. You will drive straight
                                                              forward to the outer boundary. From that position,
Pull-ups ­ When a driver stops and pulls forward              you must back the vehicle into the opposite lane
to clear an encroachment or to get a better                   until the front of your vehicle has passed the first
position, it is scored as a "pull-up". Stopping               set of cones without striking boundary lines or
without changing direction does not count as a                cones. (See Figure 12.3)
pull-up. You will not be penalized for initial pull-
ups. However, an excessive number of pull-ups,                12.2.4 ­ Parallel Park (Driver Side)
will count as errors.
                                                              You may be asked to park in a parallel parking
Outside Vehicle Observations (Looks) ­ You                    space that is on your left. You are to drive past the
may be permitted to safely stop and exit the                  entrance to the parallel parking space with your
vehicle to check the external position of the vehicle         vehicle parallel to the parking area and back into
(look). When doing so, you must place the vehicle             the space without crossing front, side or rear
in neutral and set the parking brake(s). Then,                boundaries marked by cones. You are required to
when exiting the vehicle, you must do so safely by            get your entire vehicle completely into the space.
facing the vehicle and maintaining three points of            (See Figure 12.4)
contact with the vehicle at all times (when exiting a
                                                                                                                                   Page 12-1
Section 12 ­ Basic Control Skills
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

12.2.5 ­ Parallel Park (Conventional)

You may be asked to park in a parallel parking
space that is on your right. You are to drive past
the entrance to the parallel parking space with your
vehicle parallel to the parking area and back into
the space without crossing front, side or rear
boundaries marked by cones. You are required to
get your entire vehicle completely into the space.
(See Figure 12.5)

12.2.6 ­ Alley Dock

You may be asked to sight-side back your vehicle
into an alley. You will drive past the alley and
position your vehicle parallel to the outer boundary.
From that position, back into the alley bringing the
rear of your vehicle within three feet of the rear of
the alley without touching boundary lines or cones.
Your vehicle must be straight within the alley/lane
when you have completed the maneuver. (See
Figure 12.6.)

Section 12 ­ Basic Control Skills                             Page 12-2
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                Figure 12.1: Straight Line Backing
                   Figure 12.2: Offset Back/Right

                       Figure 12.3: Offset Back/Left

Section 12 ­ Basic Control Skills                             Page 12-3
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

             Figure 12.4: Parallel Park (Driver Side)

            Figure 12.5: Parallel Park (Conventional)

Section 12 ­ Basic Control Skills                             Page 12-4
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                        Figure 12.6: Alley Dock

                                      90° Alley Dock

Section 12 ­ Basic Control Skills                             Page 12-5
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                     THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.

Section 12 ­ Basic Control Skills                             Page 12-6
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 13                                         If stopping behind another vehicle, stop where you
       On-road Driving                                        can see the rear tires on the vehicle ahead of you
                                                              (safe gap).
This Section Covers                                           Do not let your vehicle roll.
                                                              Keep the front wheels aimed straight ahead.
 How You Will Be Tested
                                                              When ready to turn:
You will drive over a test route that has a variety of        Check traffic in all directions.
traffic situations. At all times during the test, you         Keep both hands on the steering wheel during the
must drive in a safe and responsible manner and               turn.
you must:                                                     Keep checking your mirror to make sure the
Wear your safety belt.                                        vehicle does not hit anything on the inside of the
Obey all traffic signs, signals, and laws.                    turn.
Complete the test without an accident or moving               Vehicle should not move into oncoming traffic.
violation.                                                    Vehicle should finish turn in correct lane.

During the driving test, the examiner will be scoring         After turn:
you on specific driving maneuvers as well as on               Make sure turn signal is off.
your general driving behavior. You will follow the            Get up to speed of traffic, use turn signal, and
directions of the examiner. Directions will be given          move into right-most lane when safe to do so (if not
to you so you will have plenty of time to do what             already there).
the examiner has asked. You will not be asked to              Check mirrors and traffic.
drive in an unsafe manner.
                                                              13.1.2 ­ Intersections
If your test route does not have certain traffic
situations, you may be asked to simulate a traffic            As you approach an intersection:
situation. You will do this by telling the examiner           Check traffic thoroughly in all directions.
what you are or would be doing if you were in that            Decelerate gently.
traffic situation.                                            Brake smoothly and, if necessary, change gears.
                                                              If necessary, come to a complete stop (no
13.1 ­ How You Will Be Tested                                 coasting) behind any stop signs, signals,
                                                              sidewalks, or stop lines maintaining a safe gap
13.1.1 ­ Turns                                                behind any vehicle in front of you.
                                                              Your vehicle must not roll forward or backward.
You have been asked to make a turn:
Check traffic in all directions.                              When driving through an intersection:
Use turn signals and safely get into the lane                 Check traffic thoroughly in all directions
needed for the turn.                                          Decelerate and yield to any pedestrians and traffic
                                                              in the intersection.
As you approach the turn:                                     Do not change lanes while proceeding through the
Use turn signals to warn others of your turn.                 intersection.
Slow down smoothly, change gears as needed to                 Keep your hands on the wheel.
keep power, but do not coast unsafely. Unsafe
coasting occurs when your vehicle is out of gear              Once through the intersection:
(clutch depressed or gearshift in neutral) for more           Continue checking mirrors and traffic.
than the length of your vehicle.                              Accelerate smoothly and change gears as
                                                              necessary.
If you must stop before making the turn:
Come to a smooth stop without skidding.                                                                                             Page 13-1
Come to a complete stop behind the stop line,
crosswalk, or stop sign.

Section 13 ­ On-road Driving
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

13.1.3 ­ Urban Business                                       Once stopped:
                                                              Vehicle must be parallel to the curb or shoulder of
During this part of the test, you are expected to             the road and safely out of the traffic flow.
make regular traffic checks and maintain a safe               Vehicle should not be blocking driveways, fire
following distance. Your vehicle should be                    hydrants, intersections, signs, etc.
centered in the proper lane (right-most lane) and             Cancel your turn signal.
you should keep up with the flow of traffic but not           Activate your four-way emergency flashers.
exceed the posted speed limit.                                Apply the parking brake.
                                                              Move the gear shift to neutral or park.
13.1.4 ­Lane Changes                                          Remove your feet from the brake and clutch
                                                              pedals.
During multiple lane portions of the test, you will be
asked to change lanes to the left, and then back to           When instructed to resume:
the right. You should make the necessary traffic              Check traffic and your mirrors thoroughly in all
checks first, then use proper signals and smoothly            directions.
change lanes when it is safe to do so.                        Turn off your four-way flashers.
                                                              Activate the left turn signal.
13.1.5 ­ Expressway or Rural/Limited Access                   When traffic permits, you should release the
Highway                                                       parking brake and pull straight ahead.
                                                              Do not turn the wheel before your vehicle moves.
Before entering the expressway:                               Check traffic from all directions, especially to the
                                                              left.
Check traffic.                                                Steer and accelerate smoothly into the proper lane
                                                              when safe to do so.
Use proper signals.                                           Once your vehicle is back into the flow of traffic,
                                                              cancel your left turn signal.
Merge smoothly into the proper lane of traffic.
                                                              13.1.7 ­ Curve
Once on the expressway:                                       When approaching a curve:
                                                              Check traffic thoroughly in all directions.
Maintain proper lane positioning, vehicle spacing,            Before entering the curve, reduce speed so further
and vehicle speed.                                            braking or shifting is not required in the curve.
                                                              Keep vehicle in the lane.
Continue to check traffic thoroughly in all                   Continue checking traffic in all directions.
directions.
                                                              13.1.8 ­ Railroad Crossing
When exiting the expressway:
                                                              Before reaching the crossing, all commercial
Make necessary traffic checks.                                drivers should:

Use proper signals.                                           Decelerate, brake smoothly, and shift gears as
                                                              necessary.
Decelerate smoothly in the exit lane.
                                                              Look and listen for the presence of trains.
Once on the exit ramp, you must continue to                   Check traffic in all directions.
decelerate within the lane markings and maintain
adequate spacing between your vehicle and other                                                                                     Page 13-2
vehicles.

13.1.6 ­ Stop/Start

For this maneuver, you will be asked to pull your
vehicle over to the side of the road and stop as if
you were going to get out and check something on
your vehicle. You must check traffic thoroughly in
all directions and move to the right-most lane or
shoulder of road.

As you prepare for the stop:

Check traffic.

Activate your right turn signal.

Decelerate smoothly, brake evenly, change gears
as necessary.

Bring your vehicle to a full stop without coasting.

Section 13 ­ On-road Driving
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Do not stop, change gears, pass another vehicle,              Activate amber warning lights and right turn
or change lanes while any part of your vehicle is in          signals.
the crossing.                                                 Move as far as possible to the right on the traveled
                                                              portion of the roadway.
If you are driving a bus, a school bus, or a vehicle          Recheck traffic.
displaying placards, you should be prepared to
observe the following procedures at every railroad            As you stop for the student discharge, you must:
crossing (unless the crossing is exempt):                     Bring school bus to a complete stop at least 10'
                                                              away from students at the stop.
As the vehicle approaches a railroad crossing,                Place the transmission in neutral/park and set the
activate the four-way flashers.                               parking brake.
                                                              Activate the stop arm and red warning lights.
Stop the vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 15
feet from the nearest rail.                                   When discharging students, you must:
                                                              Communicate to students.
Listen and look in both directions along the track            Check traffic.
for an approaching train and for signals indicating           Open the student door.
the approach of a train. If operating a bus, you may          Check for students.
also be required to open the window and door prior
to crossing tracks. Make sure to close the door               When students are crossing, you must:
before crossing the tracks.                                   Check traffic.
                                                              Communicate to students.
Keep hands on the steering wheel as the vehicle               Check for students.
crosses the tracks.
                                                              When resuming from the student discharge, you
Do not stop, change gears, or change lanes while              must:
any part of your vehicle is proceeding across the             Check all mirrors.
tracks.                                                       Turn off warning lights and stop arm.
                                                              Close the door
Four-way flashers should be deactivated after the             Check traffic.
vehicle crosses the tracks.                                   Accelerate away from the stop area.

Continue to check mirrors and traffic.                        13.1.11 ­ General Driving Behaviors
                                                              You will be scored on your overall performance in
Not all driving road test routes will have a railroad         the following general driving behavior categories:
crossing. You may be asked to explain and
demonstrate the proper railroad crossing                      13.1.11(a) ­ Clutch Usage (for Manual
procedures to the examiner at a simulated location.           Transmission)
                                                              Always use clutch to shift.
13.1.9 ­ Bridge/Overpass/Sign                                 If equipped with an unsynchronized manual
                                                              transmission, you must double-clutch when
After driving under an overpass, you may be asked             shifting. Do not rev or lug the engine.
to tell the examiner what the posted clearance or             Do not ride clutch to control speed, coast with the
height was. After going over a bridge, you may be             clutch depressed, or "pop" the clutch.
asked to tell the examiner what the posted weight
limit was. If your test route does not have a bridge          13.1.12(b) ­ Gear Usage (for Manual
or overpass, you may be asked about another                   Transmission)
traffic sign. When asked, be prepared to identify             Do not grind or clash gears.
and explain to the examiner any traffic sign which
may appear on the route.                                                                                                            Page 13-3

13.1.10 ­ Student Discharge (School Bus)

If you are applying for a School Bus endorsement,
you will be required to demonstrate a student
discharge. Please refer to section 10 of this
manual.

As you approach the student pick up, you must:
Decelerate and approach at a slow rate of speed
while continuing to check traffic.

Section 13 ­ On-road Driving
Version: July 2017
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Select gear that does not rev or lug engine.                  ROAD TEST AUTOMATIC FAILURES
Do not shift in turns and intersections.
                                                              Driver fails to use the seat belt.
13.1.13(c) ­ Brake Usage
Do not ride or pump brake.                                    Driver received a traffic citation for a moving
Do not brake harshly. Brake smoothly using steady             violation during the Road Test.
pressure.
                                                              Driver did not obey signs or signals.
13.1.14(d) ­ Lane Usage
Do not put vehicle over curbs, sidewalks, or lane             Driver sped, rolled through stops, or ignored traffic
markings.                                                     laws.
Do not change lanes at intersections.
Stop behind stop lines, crosswalks, or stop signs.            Driver did not appropriately yield the right-of-way to
Complete a turn in the proper lane on a multiple              pedestrians or other vehicles during driving
lane road (vehicle should finish a left turn in the           maneuvers.
lane directly to the right of the center line).
Finish a right turn in the right-most (curb) lane.            Driver was involved in an avoidable crash or
Move to or remain in right-most lane unless lane is           accident.
blocked.
                                                              Driver's vehicle had physical contact with other
13.1.15 ­ Steering                                            vehicles, objects, or pedestrians, etc.
Do not over or under steer the vehicle.
Keep both hands on the steering wheel at all times            Driver commits any act that creates a dangerous or
unless shifting. Once you have completed shift,               unsafe traffic environment (near accidents, etc.)
return both hands to the steering wheel.
                                                              Drivers of other vehicles or pedestrians were
13.1.16 ­ Regular Traffic Checks                              forced to take evasive actions.
Check traffic regularly.
Check mirrors regularly.                                      Driver forces examiner to take verbal or physical
Check mirrors and traffic before, while in and after          control of the vehicle.
an intersection.
Scan and check traffic in high volume areas and               Driver put vehicle over curbs or sidewalks
areas where pedestrians are expected to be                    unnecessarily.
present.
                                                              States and jurisdictions may add additional
                                                              automatic failures as they see fit.

13.1.17 ­ Use of Turn Signals
Use turn signals properly.
Activate turn signals when required.
Activate turn signals at appropriate times.
Cancel turn signals upon completion of a turn or
lane change.

Section 13 ­ On-road Driving                                  Page 13-4
Version: July 2017
Louisiana Department of Public Safety
Office of Motor Vehicles

www.expresslane.org

1-225-925-6146
