          MARYLAND

Commercial Driver's License Manual

                                                                           DL-151 (05/26)
HUMAN TRAFFICKING IS AN
EVERYWHERE PROBLEM . . .

          WITH AN EVERYBODY SOLUTION

Human trafficking is modern-day slavery. It occurs in all 50 states in the U.S., in both rural and urban
settings, when people are subject to forced labor or illegally bought and sold for commercial sex.
A minor being sold for sex is always a victim of human trafficking.

                                             While the recruitment or purchase of victims may occur
                                             online, survivors may be recovered in many locations,
                                             including truck stops, bus terminals, local businesses,
                                             restaurants, hotels, strip clubs, private homes, a variety
                                             of events, etc. The movement of victims may include the
                                             use of rideshares, taxis or other modes of transportation.

EVERYDAY HEROES NEEDED.                      As a licensed driver, you may intersect with a human
                                             trafficking situation while you're en route somewhere,
                                             stopped at a business or in a neighborhood or attending
                                             a sporting or other event where a large number of people
                                             are gathered.

RED FLAGS TO LOOK FOR

· Signs that prostitution is taking place or if you ·

see a minor being sexually exploited

· Any mention of making a quota or having

a pimp/daddy

· Multiple cars and different men

continually going in and out of a residence ·

· People looking fearful, disheveled or crying

· Someone being controlling, threatening or

even violent with an individual                 

· People whose communication is being

restricted or controlled; the person is not     

allowed to speak for self; being watched or     ·

followed

If you suspect someone could be a victim of human trafficking, time is of the essence.

1) If you're seeing a crime in progress, call 911. When reporting a tip,       Scan this QR
  provide "actionable information," including times, dates, location and    code to download
  address of the situation, descriptions of cars or trucks involved (make,
  model, color, license plate, distinguishing marks and/or USDOT               the TAT app!
  number, etc.) and people (height, weight, hair color, eye color, age,
  etc.). Take a picture if you can. When you contact law enforcement,
  tell them you suspect human trafficking.

2) To access the national human trafficking hotlines to ascertain if you're witnessing human trafficking,
  to access services, make a report or share incidents that have been reported to law enforcement,
  call 1-888-3737-888 in the U.S., 1-833-900-1010 in Canada or 01800-5533-000 in Mexico.

3) Please do not approach traffickers. Allow law enforcement to deal with traffickers and recover victims.
  Approaching traffickers is not only dangerous for you and their victims but could lead to problems in the

  eventual prosecution of traffickers. If you do interact with a human trafficking victim, provide support
  based on your comfort level.
Table of Contents

Intro ................................................................................................................................................... 4
Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL ................................................................................... 14
Section 2: Knowledge Test Background .......................................................................................... 36
Section 3: Transporting Cargo Safely ............................................................................................ 130
Section 4: Transporting Passengers Safely ................................................................................... 137
Section 5: Air Brakes ..................................................................................................................... 145
Section 6: Combination Vehicles ................................................................................................... 172
Section 7: Doubles And Triples...................................................................................................... 200
Section 8: Tank Vehicles ............................................................................................................... 209
Section 9: Hazardous Materials ..................................................................................................... 214
Section 10: School Buses .............................................................................................................. 254
Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test ............................................................................................... 276
Section 12: Basic Control Skills Test ............................................................................................. 300
Section 13: On-road Driving .......................................................................................................... 306
Section 14: Slang Dictionary.......................................................................................................... 313
For More Information ..................................................................................................................... 319

3  Table of Contents
Intro

FMCSA Rule 49 CFR 380 ­ Special Training Requirements

The new Entry-Level Driver Training (ELDT) regulations require that all entry-level drivers of
commercial motor vehicles (CMVs) receive training from a provider list located on FMCSA's Training
Provider Registry website. Effective February 7, 2022, to be eligible to take required skills or
knowledge tests, commercial driver's license (CDL) applicants must have completed applicable entry-
level driver training from a registered training provider. Here is the link for more information on the
Federal ELDT Regulation.

Who Is Affected:

New commercial motor vehicle drivers looking to obtain a Class A or Class B for the first time; current
CDL holders wishing to upgrade their license by moving from a Class B to a Class A license, or those
adding a school bus (S), passenger (P), or hazardous materials (H) endorsement for the first time.

When:

Effective February 7, 2022

What:

CDL applicants who have never held a CDL and those switching from Class B to Class A are required
to take Entry-Level Driver Training prior to taking the driver's skills test. CDL Hazmat applicants must
have this training prior to starting the application of the Commercial Learners Permit. CDL applicants
should register on the FMCSA Training Provider Registry and successfully complete training prior to
making an appointment with MDOT MVA.

Why:

Based on a Congressional mandate to improve safety the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration (FMCSA) has required training for new CDL holders.

Exceptions:

Drivers who have held an out of state CDL and drivers who previously held CDLs but who have let
them lapse are not required to go through training to get a new CDL. Returning drivers who hold a

4      Intro
CLP prior to February 7, 2022 are not required to go through training as long as they successfully
convert to a full CDL before the CLP expires.

Information For The Commercial Driver

Foreword

In 1986, the Congress of the United States passed the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act. This
Act requires the states to adopt uniform minimum licensing and testing standards for drivers of
commercial motor vehicles. By April 1, 1992, all drivers of commercial vehicles needed a Commercial
Driver's License. Maryland's Commercial Driver's License Program became effective January 1,
1990. This was the beginning of a new era that resulted in each commercial driver to be looked upon
as a professional.

Commercial Motor Vehicle

A "Commercial Motor Vehicle" means a motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles used to
transport passengers or cargo if the vehicle fits any of the following conditions.

    · Any combination of vehicles with a Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR) of 26,001 or
         more pounds.

    · A vehicle with a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of 26,001 or more pounds (GVWR for a
         single vehicle or GCWR for a combination of vehicles means: The value specified by the
         manufacturer as the maximum gross weight).

    · Any vehicle which is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver.
    · A vehicle of any size which transports hazardous materials, which requires placarding.

   NOTE: Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR) And Gross Vehicle Weight Rating
   (GVWR) Means The Value Specified By The Manufacturer. This Is Determined From The
   Manufacture Plate On The Vehicle/Trailer.

Maryland Commercial Driver License Classes

Each driver applicant must possess and be tested on his/her knowledge and skills, for the commercial
motor vehicle for which he/she desires a commercial driver's license and obtain the appropriate
endorsement(s) where required.

5  Intro
Class A License: Authorizes the licensee to operate Tractor/Trailer or Combination of vehicles with a
GCWR of 26,001 or more pounds if the GVWR of the vehicle being towed is in excess of 10,000
pounds.

Class B License: Authorizes the licensee to operate any single vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 or
more pounds; and any such vehicle towing a vehicle not in excess of 10,000 pounds GVWR.

Class C License: Authorizes the licensee to operate any single vehicle less than 26,001 pounds
GVWR; or any such vehicle towing a vehicle not in excess of 10,000 pounds GVWR, and is designed
to transport 16 or more passengers including the driver, or is used in the transportation of materials
found to be hazardous for the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act and which requires the motor
vehicle to be placarded under the Hazardous Materials Regulations.

ENDORSEMENTS:
    · T = Doubles/Triple Trailers
    · P = Passenger Vehicles
    · N = Tank Vehicles
    · H = Hazardous Materials
    · S = School Buses
    · X = Tank & Hazardous Materials

Vehicles That Have Been Excluded

Waivers have been granted for the operation of some commercial vehicles. You are not required to
have a Commercial Driver's License to drive a vehicle that has been excluded. However, you must
have a Maryland non-commercial driver's license of the appropriate class to operate a vehicle
that has been excluded. (With the exception of fire apparatus, that may be operated by the use
of an Emergency Vehicle Operator Card (EVOC) and a valid State driver's license. See your
fire chief for details).

The following vehicles have been excluded from CDL requirements in Maryland:

    1. Controlled and operated by a farmer;
             · Used to transport agricultural products, farm machinery, or farm supplies to or from a
                  farm;
             · Not used in the operations of a common or contract motor carrier; and
             · Used within 150 miles of the person's farm;

    2. An emergency vehicle;
             · Equipped with audible and visual signals (fire apparatus); and
             · Operated by a member of, or a person in the employ of, a volunteer or paid fire or
                  rescue organization;

6  Intro
    3. A vehicle owned or operated by the United States Department of Defense if it is controlled and
         operated by;
             · Any member of the military reserves or National Guard on active-duty including
                  personnel on full- time National Guard duty and personnel on part-time training; or

    4. A motor vehicle designed and constructed primarily to provide temporary living quarters for
         recreational, camping, or travel use.

Physical Qualifications (49 CFR 391.41)

A person shall not drive a commercial motor vehicle unless they are physically qualified to drive a
commercial motor vehicle by obtaining a Medical Examiner's Certificate through a Medical Examiner
within the National Registry of Certified Medical Examiners.

Based on a medical disqualification you may be eligible to process for an Intrastate (Maryland Only)
or Interstate (Federal) Waiver. Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration will only consider issuing CDL
Intrastate Waivers for the physical/medical conditions listed below.

    · Amputation and loss of limb (Must have working prosthesis)
    · Power grasping and prehension
    · Deaf/Hard of Hearing (LIMITED Eligibility)

The Motor Vehicle Administration will not consider an intrastate waiver for an individual who
maintains a Hazardous Materials, Passenger and/or School Bus endorsements.

The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration may issue a waiver to individuals who do not meet
the qualifications of Title 49 CFR 391.41 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations that cover
amputation, loss of a limb, power grasping or prehension problems, and deaf/hard of hearing
(LIMITED eligibility).

Medical Certification and Self-Certification

MEDICAL CERTIFICATION (FORM MCSA-5876)

As of January 30, 2014, the Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) enacted new procedures
for commercial driver's license (CDL) holders to comply with requirements implemented by the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA). As of July 8, 2015, FMCSA revised the
Medical Examiner's Certificate (Med Cert - formerly DOT card). The new form (MCSA5876) will be
provided to you by the Medical Examiner.

All CDL holders are required to maintain a valid updated medical certification card (Med Cert) and
self-certify to the type of commerce (see below) to the MVA throughout their licensing period (where
required). The MVA will add the medical certification status and the information from the medical
certification documents (DOT card, waiver/exemption if required) to your commercial driving record.

7  Intro
As of June 23, 2025, you will no longer provide a Medical Examiner's Certificate directly to the MVA.
The MVA will obtain this information directly from FMCSA's National Registry.

It is your responsibility to obtain a current and valid medical certificate before or upon expiration of the
previous medical certificate. You do not need to wait to be notified, but correspondence will be sent to
your residence/mailing address on file 45 days prior to expiration requesting documentation.

If you fail to do so within the period indicated, your entire commercial driving privileges will be
automatically downgraded to a non-commercial Class C license, and you will need to schedule an
appointment (mymva.maryland.gov) at an MVA branch office to obtain the Class C license. If you
have been downgraded, you will need to schedule an appointment (mymva.maryland.gov) at a MVA
branch office to reinstate your CDL.

It is imperative that all CDL holders maintain a current residence/mailing address with the MVA
(provided in person) in order to receive correspondence and avoid an automatic downgrade of your
commercial driving privilege. MVA mail is not forwarded and if you do not comply, you are not
authorized to operate a commercial motor vehicle.

SCHOOL BUS ENDORSEMENT

Under federal law and state law, the Maryland Department of Transportation Motor Vehicle
Administration (MDOT MVA) must cancel a Commercial Driver's License (CDL) when the holder fails
to submit the required medical certification.

As a CDL driver who holds an "S" endorsement you must obtain a new Medical Examiner's Certificate
annually. If you take no action, your driving record will automatically reflect the removal of the "S"
endorsement from your license.

SELF-CERTIFICATION

All CDL holders will be required to select one of the categories listed below:

    · Non-Excepted Interstate (NI) - The CDL holder is qualified to drive a commercial motor
         vehicle across state lines in accordance with Title 49 CFR Part 391 of the Federal Motor
         Carrier Safety Regulation (FMCSR).

    · Non-Excepted Intrastate (NA) - The CDL holder is qualified to drive a commercial vehicle
         ONLY within the state of Maryland and has an approved MVA CDL Medical Waiver.

    · Excepted Interstate (EI) - The CDL holder drives a commercial motor vehicle across state
         lines ONLY for specific excepted activities, such as to transport school children or staff, sick or
         injured persons, corpses, etc., in accordance with Title 49 CFR Part 391 of the Federal Motor
         Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR). Since the driver must meet all Maryland requirements
         without an MVA CDL Medical Waiver, the CDL holder may select NI to maximize his/her
         driving options

    · Excepted Intrastate (EA) - The CDL holder drives a commercial motor vehicle ONLY within
         Maryland. Although exempt from the qualification requirements under Title 49 CFR Part 391 of
         the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR) based on the type of driving

8  Intro
         performed, the CDL holder must meet all Maryland requirements without an MVA CDL Medical
         Waiver and may select NI to maximize his/her driving options.

Commercial Drivers License Learners Instructional Permit:

You will be required to provide:

    · Proof of age.
    · Lawful admission into the United States (for Hazardous Materials only).
    · Proof of Maryland residence.
    · A valid full Maryland Non-Commercial Driver's License (must be off provisional license).

             o You must be 21 years of age to drive a commercial motor vehicle across state lines
                  (Interstate).

             o You must be 18 years of age to drive a commercial motor vehicle within Maryland
                  (Intrastate).

             o You must be 21 years of age to haul hazardous materials.
    · A Medical Examiner's Certificate (DOT Card); Intrastate/Interstate Waiver prior to taking

         required tests which includes passing the vision screening and any required CDL knowledge
         tests before a learner's instructional permit will be issued.

When you apply for a Commercial Driver's License you will also be asked to:

    · Certify that you do not have a driver's license from more than one state or country,
    · Surrender your current license,
    · Certify that your driver's license and driving privilege is not suspended, revoked, cancelled, or

         disqualified or subject to any of these actions, and
    · Provide information to the Motor Vehicle Administration of previous State licenses (to include

         Washington, D.C.) held in the previous 10 years including previous addresses and license
         numbers.

Knowledge Tests/Endorsements

Depending on the class of license and what endorsements you are requesting will determine what
CDL knowledge tests are required. A passing score of 80% is required per test. You must obtain a
Medical Examiner's Certificate (DOT Card) and a valid Intrastate State/Interstate Waiver if applicable.
If you fail any knowledge test for the second time, you must wait a minimum of seven days before you
can re-take that specific test again. The following endorsements will not be listed on your CLP until
you have completed and pass your skills test: Double/Triples and Hazmat.

    · General Knowledge Test is required for all applicants. (Must be successfully passed to
         proceed to additional knowledge tests).

    · Air Brake Knowledge Test is required if your vehicle is equipped with air brakes.

9  Intro
    · Combination Vehicles Knowledge Test is required if you want to drive combination vehicles
         (Trailer over 10,000 lbs. GVWR).

    · Tanker Knowledge Test is required if you want to haul liquids in bulk.

    · Double/Triples Knowledge Test is required to pull double or triple trailers.

    · Passenger Knowledge Test is required for all bus drivers to include school bus operators.
         (You must perform a skills test in a bus of the appropriate class/endorsement).

    · School Bus Knowledge Test is required for all school bus operators, as well as the
         Passenger Knowledge Test. (You must also perform skills test in a school bus of appropriate
         class).

    · Hazardous Materials Knowledge Test is required if you wish to haul hazardous materials.
         You must pass the hazardous materials knowledge test and provide proof of U.S. Citizenship
         or lawful permanent resident status. Individuals are required to schedule an appointment for
         the completion of the electronic Hazmat application and fingerprint/background record check
         process. The Administration may not issue a hazardous material endorsement to a
         commercial driver's license holder without the approval of the Transportation Security
         Administration (TSA) of the Federal Department of Homeland Security. You are required
         to pay the appropriate fees. The Administration may not issue a Learner's Instructional Permit
         with a Hazardous Materials Endorsement.

             o Maryland law requires that each out-of-state CDL license holder with the Hazardous
                  Materials Endorsement must complete a new TSA Hazmat Threat Assessment
                  Background Record check here in Maryland, even if they completed one previously.

             o Additional Hazmat information may be obtained by contacting the MVA at 1-800-950-
                  1MVA, 1-800-950-1682 or at www.MVA.Maryland.gov or by contacting the TSA at their
                  website, www.TSA.gov and inserting CDL Hazmat in the Search field.

             o Subsequent Hazardous Materials knowledge test are by appointment only if the
                  applicant fails the first test.

Hazmat Endorsement

Under federal law, the Maryland Department of Transportation Motor Vehicle Administration (MDOT
MVA) must cancel a Commercial Driver's License (CDL) when the holder fails to submit the required
TSA background or TWIC card for Hazmat. As a CDL driver who holds a "Hazmat Endorsement" you
must submit a new TSA Background or TWIC card prior to the expiration date. If you take no action,
your driving record will automatically reflect the removal of the "Hazmat Endorsement" from your
license.

To keep your CDL and Hazmat endorsement in good standing, please schedule an appointment on
our website.

For customers requiring a new TSA Background check and fingerprint services schedule an
appointment at https://mymva.maryland.gov/go/web/AddAppointment. Select "Commercial Driver's
License Services," then "Add/Renew a CDL Hazmat Endorsement." Hazmat fingerprinting and
background checks are only available at MDOT MVA offices in Glen Burnie, Bel Air, Frederick,
Salisbury, or Waldorf.

10  Intro
   NOTE: You will be required to take the knowledge (written) test. The test is included as a part
   of the CDL Hazmat appointment.

For customers updating a TWIC card, a knowledge (written) test is required. Schedule CDL
knowledge test at https://mymva.maryland.gov/go/web/AddAppointment. Select "Commercial Driver's
License Services," then "Retake My Commercial Learner's Permit Test." Don't forget to bring your
new TWIC card to the appointment.

Skills Test Are Administered by Appointment Only

The CDL Skills Test consists of a:
    1. Pre-Trip Inspection to include an air brake test if vehicle is equipped with air brakes;
    2. Basic Control Skills Test; and
    3. Public Road Test.

   NOTE: You Must Pass The Pre-Trip Inspection To Continue Onto The Basic Control Skills
   Test And You Must Pass The Basic Control Skills Test To Continue Onto A Public Road Test.

If you fail any portion of the test you must pay a retest fee before scheduling another appointment.

Qualifying Scores

    · A Pre-Trip Inspection score is based on the type of vehicle.
    · A Basic Control Skills Test is based on total points (9 points are a failure). An automatic failure

         will occur if an individual hits a curb, or exceeds the time limit (see below).
    · A Public Road Test is based on total points (31 points are a failure) or an automatic failure will

         occur if there is an accident, running a red light or stop sign, etc.

Time Limit (All Vehicle Classes A, B, & C)
(subject to change without notice):

    · A Pre-Trip Inspection is 45 minutes.
    · A Basic Control Skills Test is 10 minutes per maneuver.
    · A Public Road Test on average is 35 to 40 minutes based on MVA location and route.

11  Intro
   NOTE: Skills Tests are not available at all Motor Vehicle locations. Skills Tests are given only
   by appointment. Knowledge Tests are given on a walk-in basis initially, then by appointment
   thereafter. No test will start after 3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. No test will start after
   10:00 a.m. on Saturday.

Driving, Drinking, and Drugs

Signing a Maryland's driver license or a learner's permit application form enters you into an
agreement. It says that if you are detained by a police officer who suspects you are driving or
attempting to drive under the influence or intoxicated by alcohol and/or drugs, you agree to submit to
a chemical test of your blood and breath. This is called a Blood Alcohol Concentration, or BAC test.

An alcohol concentration of 0.04% or more when driving a Commercial Motor Vehicle will:

    · Disqualify you from driving a commercial motor vehicle for one year (three years if the vehicle
         was required to be placarded for HAZMAT) for the first offense, and;

    · Disqualify you for life for a subsequent offense

An alcohol concentration of 0.08% or more while operating on a commercial driver license,
regardless of the vehicle type, will:

    · Disqualify you from driving a commercial motor vehicle for one year for the first offense, and;
    · Disqualify you for life for a subsequent offense.

IMPLIED CONSENT:

In Maryland, any person who drives or attempts to drive a motor vehicle on a highway or on any
private property used by the public in general, consents to take a test to determine alcohol
concentration or a test to determine the concentration of a drug or a controlled dangerous substance.
Testing is free of charge to the driver and shall be given a breath test to determine alcohol
concentration, unless the driver or other persons require medical treatment for serious or life-
threatening injury or the test equipment is unavailable. In that event, the test shall be a blood test. A
test to determine drug or controlled dangerous substance content shall also be a blood test.

A refusal to submit to take a test will:

    · Disqualify you from driving a commercial motor vehicle for one year for the first offense, and;
    · Disqualify you for life for a subsequent offense.

CDL holders are also subject to driver disqualifications and penalties under Federal Motor
Carrier Safety Regulation 385.51.

12  Intro
Drivers Must

    · Notify their home state Motor Vehicle Administration of any convictions in other states.
    · Notify their employer of any convictions.
    · Notify their employer of any revocation, suspension, cancellation, or disqualification.
    · Provide information to the Motor Vehicle Administration of previous State licenses (to include

         Washington, D.C.) held in the previous 10 years including previous addresses and license
         numbers.
    · Maintain a valid Medical Examiner's Certificate (DOT card), and Intrastate/Interstate Waiver if
         applicable, during all MVA transactions.
    · Maintain only one driver's license.

Convictions

Effective September 30, 2005, any convictions you receive for moving violations will be viewed as a
cause to disqualify you from driving a commercial vehicle, regardless of whether the moving violation
happened while you were driving a commercial vehicle,

non-commercial vehicle or your private vehicle.

    · Probation Before Judgment (PBJ) is considered a conviction under federal regulations and
    · MD TA § 16-803(d).
    · The Administration may not issue any type of temporary, conditional or work restricted license

         per The Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR) 11.11.12.07 and Title 49 CFR 384.210 under
         the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR).

Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) works closely with The American Association of Motor
Vehicle Administrators (AAMVA) in testing procedures that meet Federal requirements. Although we
make every effort to ensure that the information we provide is accurate, it is not intended to
take the place of published State and Federal Laws and Regulations.

13  Intro
Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL

This Section Covers:
    4. Commercial Motor Vehicles
    5. Commercial Driver License Types & Tests
    6. Medical Documentation Requirements
    7. Driver Disqualifications
    8. Other Safety Rules
    9. International Registration Program

The federal government requires each state to have minimum standards for the licensing of
commercial drivers.
This manual has information for drivers who want a commercial driver's license (CDL). This manual
does NOT have information on all the federal and state requirements to drive a commercial motor
vehicle (CMV).

1.1 ­ Commercial Motor Vehicles

There are some important words to learn to understand all the requirements to become a commercial
vehicle driver. The first is understanding what a commercial vehicle is. But before we can explain that
we must explain the weight ratings that help figure out what a commercial vehicle is.
Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR) is the most a vehicle and trailer can safely weigh
together when fully loaded.
That includes:

    · The towing vehicle (with people, fuel, and cargo)
    · The trailer
    · Everything on or inside the trailer
The vehicle manufacturer decides this limit to keep the vehicle safe and working properly.
Example:
If your truck's GCWR is 20,000 pounds, and the truck (with fuel, driver, and cargo) weighs 7,000
pounds, then the trailer and its load can weigh up to 13,000 pounds.

14  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
Another term is Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR). This is the most your vehicle can safely
weigh by itself when fully loaded.

That includes:

    · The vehicle
    · The driver and passengers
    · Fuel
    · Cargo
    · Any tools or equipment inside or on it

The manufacturer sets this limit to make sure the vehicle stays safe and works like it should.

Example:
If a van has a GVWR of 9,000 pounds, and the van itself weighs 6,000 pounds, then you can safely
carry up to 3,000 pounds of people and cargo.

    · A Commercial Motor Vehicle is any vehicle that fits the conditions below:
    · Any combination of vehicles with a GCWR of 26,001 pounds or more
    · A vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 pounds or more
    · Any vehicle that is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver.
    · Any vehicle transporting hazardous materials which must have a placard.

You must have a CDL to drive any commercial motor vehicle.

1.2 ­ Commercial Driver License Types & Tests

1.2.1 ­ CDL Classifications

The type of CDL and endorsement you need to apply for depends on the vehicle class and the type of
cargo you plan to transport. There are three basic vehicle classes:

Class A - Combination Vehicles

Any combination of vehicles with a GCWR of 26,001 pounds or more is in Class A as long as the
GVWR of the vehicle(s) being towed is more than 10,000 pounds.

Most Class A vehicles are trucks or semis towing a second vehicle like a trailer. Driving a Class A
vehicle takes more skill and knowledge than driving vehicles in Classes B and C. Since these skills
include those required to drive a B and C vehicle, if you have a Class A license, you may also drive
vehicles in Classes B and C.

15  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
Class B - Heavy Straight Vehicles

Any single vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 pounds or more or towing another vehicle with a GVWR of
10,000 pounds or less is in Class B.

Class B includes straight trucks and large buses, including articulated buses. Safely driving these
heavy vehicles takes more knowledge and skill than driving the small trucks and buses found in Class
C. Since they include the skills required to drive Class C vehicles, if you have qualified for a Class B
license you may also drive vehicles in Class C.

Class C - Small Vehicles

Any single vehicle with a GVWR less than 26,001 pounds or any such vehicle towing another vehicle
weighing 10,000 pounds GVWR or less is in Class C. However, vehicles of this size are included in
the CDL program only if they are:

    1. Designed to carry 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or
    2. Used to transport hazardous materials in quantities requiring placarding under the Hazardous

         Materials Regulations (49 CFR Part 172, Subpart F) or carrying material listed as a select
         agent or toxin in Title 42 CFR part 73 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations
         (FMCSR).

There are many vehicles in Class C. Larger Class C vehicles may need more skill and knowledge to
operate than smaller ones. However, the licensing category is mostly based on the type of cargo the
vehicle carries. Crashes with hazardous materials or passengers can be very dangerous. To keep
people safe, drivers of smaller Class C vehicles must have special training and CDL.

Some Vehicles Have Been Excluded From the Requirement for a CDL

There are some vehicles you are allowed to operate without having a CDL. You must have a
Maryland non-commercial driver's license of the correct class to operate a vehicle that has been
excluded from the CDL requirement. However, fire apparatus can be driven with an Emergency
Vehicle Operator Card (EVOC) and a valid State driver's license. Check with your fire chief for details.

The following vehicles do not require a CDL in Maryland:

    · A vehicle controlled and operated by a farmer that is used to:
             o Transport agricultural products, farm machinery, or farm supplies to or from a farm;
             o Operate within 150 miles of the person's farm; and
             o Not used for common or contract motor carrier operations

    · An emergency vehicle
             o That is equipped with lights and sirens (fire truck); and
             o Operated by a member or employee of, or a person in the employ of, a volunteer or paid
                  fire or rescue organization;
             o A vehicle owned or operated by the United States Department of Defense if it is driven
                  by; a member of the military reserves or National Guard on active-duty including
                  personnel on full- time National Guard duty or part-time training

16  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
    · A motor vehicle built to provide temporary living space for recreational, camping, or travel use.

1.2.2 ­ CDL Endorsements & Restrictions

ENDORSEMENTS

All commercial drivers who drive certain types of vehicles or haul certain types of cargo must add
endorsements to their CDL and Commercial Learner's Instructional Permit (CLP). Endorsements
show you have the knowledge needed for driving those types of vehicles and transporting those types
of cargo. There are six kinds of CDL endorsements, depending on the vehicle or cargo.

T - Double and Triple Trailers

If you have a Class A CDL, you may want to pull double or triple trailers. A lot of knowledge and skill
is needed to safely pull double and triple trailers in different traffic conditions and driving
environments. You must add a T endorsement to your CDL if you want to pull double or triple trailers.
An exam on the problems associated with pulling multiple trailers must be passed. Triple trailers are
not permitted to be driven on Maryland roads.

P - Passengers

If you want to drive a vehicle made to carry 16 or more people, including the driver, you must add a
passenger endorsement to your CDL/CLP. You must pass a special knowledge test on how to safely
transport passengers and must pass skills tests in a passenger vehicle. The endorsement applies to
drivers who want to drive a bus in any Class (A, B, or C).

S - School Buses

If you want to drive a school bus, you must add a school bus endorsement to your CDL/CLP. You
must pass a special knowledge test on safely transporting passengers on a school bus and you must
pass skills tests in a school bus. This endorsement applies to drivers who want to drive a school bus
in any class (A, B, or C).

N - Tank Vehicle

If you drive a commercial vehicle with any number of tanks that hold liquids or gases, you need an N
endorsement. This applies to:

    · Any tank that holds more than 119 gallons, and
    · The total capacity of all tanks is 1,000 gallons or more.

The tanks can be permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle. This always applies to Class A
and Class B vehicles. It only applies to Class C vehicles if the vehicle is hauling hazardous materials.
Driving with liquids in bulk can cause driving control problems because the cargo is heavy, prone to
shifting, and has a high center of gravity. You must pass an exam on the problems posed by large
volume liquid cargo to add this endorsement to your CDL/CLP.

17  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
H - Hazardous Materials

If you want to drive any Class of vehicle (A, B or C) that carries a hazardous material listed under the
Federal Hazardous Materials Transportation Law (49 U.S.C. 5103) you must add the Hazardous
Materials endorsement to your CDL. This includes materials that need a placard under the Federal
Hazardous Materials Transportation Law (49 U.S.C. 5103) and the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Regulations (FMCSR) 49 CFR part 172, or any amount of an agent or toxin that is listed in Title 42
CFR part 73 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR). You must pass a special
written exam on how to recognize, handle, and transport hazardous materials.

The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and the US Department of Transportation require
background checks on commercial drivers who are certified to transport hazardous materials. These
background checks review criminal, immigration, and FBI records. If you are found to be a security
risk, TSA will notify you and the state will not issue the hazardous materials endorsement. Maryland
accepts Transportation Worker Identification Credential (TWIC) cards for the background check
requirement.

X - Combination Hazardous Materials and Tank Vehicle

If you drive tank vehicles which haul hazardous materials or waste in amounts requiring placards, you
must add an X endorsement to your CDL. This endorsement shows you have passed the special
knowledge tests for both tank vehicles and hazardous materials.

   NOTE: The only endorsements that may be added to a Commercial Learner's Permit (CLP)
   are:

    P ­ Passenger

    S - School Bus

    N - Tank Vehicle

RESTRICTIONS

Restrictions may be added to Commercial Driver Licenses and Permits based on the type of vehicle
and equipment you use for the Skills Test. There are ten standardized restriction codes.

E - No Manual Transmission

If you pass the skills test in a vehicle equipped with an automatic transmission, it must be displayed
on the issued CDL that you are restricted from operating a CMV equipped with a manual
transmission. For the skills test and the restrictions, an automatic transmission is any transmission
that does not require full use of a gear shift and clutch.

18  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
K - Intrastate Only

If you certify your status as either Non-Excepted Intrastate or Excepted Intrastate, it must be shown
on the issued CDL that you are restricted from operating a CMV in interstate commerce. If you are
under 21, you must have this intrastate restriction.

L - No Air Brake Equipped CMV

If you fail or don't take the air brake component of the knowledge test, or you take the skills test in a
vehicle that does not have air brakes, the issued CLP or CDL will show that you are restricted from
operating a CMV equipped with any type of air brakes. For the skills test and the restrictions, air
brakes are any braking system that uses air pressure, either fully or partially.

M - No Class A Passenger Vehicle

If you apply for a passenger endorsement and take the skills test in a passenger vehicle requiring a
Class B CDL, it must be shown on the issued CDL that you are restricted from operating a passenger
vehicle requiring a Class A CDL.

N - No Class A and B Passenger Vehicle

If you apply for a passenger endorsement and take the skills test in a passenger vehicle requiring a
Class C CDL, it must be shown on the issued CDL that you are restricted from operating a passenger
vehicle requiring a Class A or B CDL

   NOTE: If a CLP is issued with an N endorsement, it must also contain an X restriction ­ No
   cargo in a CMV tank vehicle.

O - No Tractor Trailer CMV

If you take the skills test in a combination vehicle for a Class A CDL with the power unit and towed
unit connected with a pintle hook or other type of connection that is not fifth-wheel, it must be shown
on the issued CDL that you are restricted from operating a tractor-trailer combinations connected by a
fifth-wheel that requires a Class A CDL.

   NOTE: If you pass a skills test using a combination vehicle that is NOT a Truck Tractor
   Semi-Trailer combination, but has a fifth wheel, you will be issued a CDL with an O
   restriction.

P - No Passengers in CMV Bus

If you have a CLP with a P endorsement, you can't drive a CMV carrying passengers, unless they are
Federal/State auditors and inspectors, test examiners, other trainees, and the CDL holder
accompanying you according to Title 49 CFR 383.25(a)(1) of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Regulations(FMCSR).

19  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
   NOTE: If you have a CLP with an S endorsement, you cannot drive a school bus with
   passengers, unless they are Federal/State auditors and inspectors, test examiners, other
   trainees, and the CDL holder accompanying you according to Title 49 CFR 383.25(a)(1) of
   the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations(FMCSR).

   NOTE: If a CLP is issued with a Passenger (P) or a School Bus (S) endorsement, it must
   also contain a P ­ No passengers in a CMV bus restriction. In Maryland, the
   accompanying driver must hold the CDL required to operate the vehicle of that class and type
   for 3 years or more.

V - Medical Variance

If the State is notified according to Title 49 CFR 383.73(o)(3) of the Federal Motor Carriers Safety
Regulations (FMCSR) that you have been issued a medical variance, the State must add the V
restriction on the CDL.

X - No Cargo in CMV Tank Vehicle

If you have a CLP with an N endorsement, you may only operate an empty tank vehicle and cannot
operate any tank vehicle that was carrying hazardous materials and has not been purged of any
residue.

Z - No Full Air Brake Equipped CMV

If you take the skills test in a vehicle equipped with air over hydraulic brakes, the State must add a Z
restriction on the CDL. This means that you are restricted from operating a CMV equipped with any
braking system operating fully on the air brake principle. Air over hydraulic brakes includes any
braking system operating partially on the air brake and partially on the hydraulic brake principle.

1.2.3 ­ To Get a CDL or CLP

COMMERCIAL DRIVERS LICENSE LEARNER'S INSTRUCTIONAL PERMIT:

To get a Commercial Driver's License Learner's Instructional Permit, you must:

    · Be able to show proof of age
    · Be able to show lawful admission into the United States (for Hazardous Materials only)
    · Be able to show proof of Maryland residence
    · Have a valid full Maryland Non-Commercial Driver's License (must be off provisional license).
    · Get a Medical Examiner's Certificate (Med Cert); Intrastate/Interstate Waiver before taking any

         tests which includes passing the vision screening and any required CDL knowledge tests
         before a learner's instructional permit will be issued.

There are some age restrictions for getting your CDL:

20  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
    · You must be 21 years of age to drive a commercial motor vehicle across state lines
         (Interstate).

    · You must be 18 years of age to drive a commercial motor vehicle within Maryland (Intrastate).
    · You must be 21 years of age to haul hazardous materials.

When you apply for a Commercial Driver's License you must:

    · Confirm you don't have a driver's license from more than one state or country
    · Certify your driver's license and driving privileges are currently valid and not prohibited.

Provide the Motor Vehicle Administration with details of all driver's licenses you've had in the past 10
years, in any state including Washington, D.C.

To get a CDL or CLP, you must pass knowledge and skills tests. This manual will help you pass the
tests. It is not a substitute for a truck driver training class or program. Formal training is the most
reliable way to learn the skills needed for safely driving a large commercial vehicle and becoming a
professional driver in the trucking industry. Figure 1.1 and Figure 1.1A helps you determine if you
need a CDL.

    Figure 1.1

21              Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
    NOTE: A bus may be Class A, B, or C depending on whether the GVWR is over 26,001
    pounds or is a combination vehicle.

                                                           Figure 1.1A

1.2.4 ­ Commercial Driver License Tests

KNOWLEDGE TESTS
You will have to take one or more knowledge tests, depending on what class of license and what
endorsements you need. Everyone applying for a CDL must take the General Knowledge Test. The
other CDL knowledge tests include:

    · Passenger Transport Test ­ You must take this test if you want to drive a bus.
    · School Bus Test ­ You must take this test if you want to drive a school bus.

22  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
    · Air Brakes Test ­ You must take this test if your vehicle has air brakes, including air over
         hydraulic brakes.

    · Combination Vehicles Test ­ You must take this test if you want to drive combination
         vehicles.

    · Doubles/Triples Test ­ You must take this test if you want to pull double or triple trailers.

    · Hazardous Materials Test ­ You must take this test if you want to haul hazardous materials
         as defined in Title 49 CFR 383.5 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR). To
         get this endorsement, you are also required to pass a Transportation Security Administration
         (TSA) background check.

    · Tank Vehicle Test ­ You must take this test if you want to haul any liquid or gaseous
         materials in a tank or tanks having an individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and
         an aggregate rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more that is either permanently or temporarily
         attached to the vehicle or chassis

SKILLS TESTS

If you pass the required knowledge test(s), you can take the CDL skills test when you meet all the
eligibility requirements. The CDL Skills Test has three segments: Vehicle inspection, basic vehicle
control, and on-road driving. You must take the segments in the order listed and pass each one
before moving to the next. You must take these tests in the type of vehicle for which you wish to be
licensed. You cannot take the CDL Skills Test with any vehicle with its components marked or
labeled.

    1. Vehicle Inspection. You will be tested to see if you know whether your vehicle is safe to drive.
         You will be asked to do an inspection of your vehicle. You must point to/touch and name the
         item you are inspecting and explain to the examiner what you would inspect and why.

    2. Basic Vehicle Control. You will be tested on your skill to control the vehicle. You will be
         asked to move your vehicle forward, backward, and turn it within a defined area. These areas
         may be marked with traffic lanes, cones, barriers, or something similar. The examiner will tell
         you how each control test is to be done.

    3. On-road Driving Test. You will be tested on your skill to safely drive your vehicle in different
         traffic situations. The situations may include left and right turns, intersections, railroad
         crossings, curves, up and down grades, single or multi-lane roads, streets, or highways. The
         examiner will tell you where to drive.

Figure 1.2 details which sections of this manual you should study for each class of license and for
each endorsement.

23  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
    Figure 1.2 ­ What to Study

1.3 ­ Medical Documentation Requirements

To get a CDL or CLP, you must first visit a certified medical examiner to have a medical examination
to determine your fitness to be a Commercial Driver. The medical examiner will submit this
information to a national registry which the MVA will be able to automatically see when you apply.

24                              Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
If you have a CDL, you must keep a valid updated Med Cert as long as your CDL is active. The MVA
will update your commercial driving record with your medical certification status and the details from
the medical certification documents, such as your DOT card or any waiver or exemption.

As of June 23, 2025, you will no longer give a Med Cert directly to the MVA. The MVA will get this
information directly from FMCSA's National Registry.

It is your responsibility to get a current and valid medical certificate before or when your previous
medical certificate expires. You don't need to wait to be notified, but a letter will be sent to your
mailing address on file with the MVA 45 days before the expiration date to remind you.

If you don't get your new medical certificate before the old one expires, your entire commercial driving
privileges will be automatically downgraded to a non-commercial Class C license. If you have been
downgraded, you will need to schedule an appointment at a MVA branch office to reinstate your CDL.
These appointments can be scheduled online at mymva.maryland.gov.

As a CDL holder, it is important to keep a current residence or mailing address with the MVA in order
to receive correspondence and avoid an automatic downgrade of your commercial driving privilege.
Mail from the MVA is not forwarded, so if you don't give your current address, you may miss important
mail and no longer be allowed to drive a commercial motor vehicle.

   NOTE: Physical Qualifications (Title 49 CFR 391.41 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
   Regulations)

   You must not drive a commercial motor vehicle unless you are physically qualified to drive a
   commercial motor vehicle. You are required to get a Medical Examiner's Certificate through a
   Medical Examiner within the National Registry of Certified Medical Examiners to determine if
   you are physically qualified.

   This exam is only about your qualifications for driving a commercial vehicle and not about
   your qualifications for driving your personal vehicle. If the Medical Examiner determines you
   are not physically qualified, you may still be eligible for the Maryland intrastate waiver or for a
   Federal Intrastate Waiver.

1.3.1 ­ Self Certifying

All Commercial Drivers are required to provide a self-certification to drive a CMV. When you apply for
or renew a CDL / CLP, you will be asked where you intend to drive (inside Maryland or across state
boundaries) and the type of business you will be driving for.
The following information will help you decide how to self-certify.

INTERSTATE OR INTRASTATE COMMERCE
Interstate commerce is when you drive a CMV:

    · From one State to another State or a foreign country; or

25  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
    · Between two places within a State but, during part of the trip, the CMV crosses into another
         State or foreign country; or

    · Between two places within a State, but the cargo or passengers are part of a trip that began or
         will end in another State or foreign country.

Intrastate commerce is when you drive a CMV within a State, and you don't meet any of the
descriptions above for interstate commerce.

If you operate in both intrastate commerce and interstate commerce, you must choose interstate
commerce.

WHAT IS THE INTRASTATE WAIVER?

If a driver doesn't meet the federal medical requirements to drive a commercial vehicle (like for
vision, hearing loss, diabetes, or missing limbs), they might still be able to drive a commercial motor
vehicle (CMV) within one state -- this is called intrastate driving.

Some states offer a waiver or variance that lets these drivers keep working as long as they:

    · Only drive within that state's borders
    · Meet the state's own safety and medical rules

The Motor Vehicle Administration will not consider an intrastate waiver for someone who has
Hazardous Materials, Passenger, or School Bus endorsements.

SELF-CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS

When you self-certify at an MVA location, you will be asked to choose from one of the four following
options:

    · Non-Excepted Interstate (NI) ­ You are qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle across
         state lines according to Title 49 CFR Part 391 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulation
         (FMCSR).

    · Non-Excepted Intrastate (NA) ­ You are qualified to drive a commercial vehicle ONLY within
         the state of Maryland and have an approved MVA CDL Medical Waiver.

    · Excepted Interstate (EI) ­ You drive a commercial motor vehicle across state lines ONLY for
         specific excepted activities, such as transporting school children or staff, sick or injured
         persons, corpses, etc., according Title 49 CFR Part 391 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
         Regulation (FMCSR). Since you must meet all Maryland requirements without an MVA CDL
         Medical Waiver, you may select NI to maximize your driving options.

    · Excepted Intrastate (EA) ­ You only drive a commercial motor vehicle within Maryland which
         makes you exempt from the qualification requirements under Title 49 CFR Part 391 of the
         Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulation (FMCSR) based on the type of driving you do.
         However, you must still meet all Maryland requirements without needing an MVA CDL Medical
         Waiver. You can choose NI (Non-Excepted) to give you more driving options.

26  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
    Figure 1.3

1.4 ­ CDL Disqualifications

1.4.1 ­ General

There are important rules you must follow to keep your CDL. If you break these rules, your
CDL can become disqualified. You may not drive a commercial motor vehicle if you are disqualified
for any reason.

1.4.2 ­ Alcohol, Leaving the Scene of an Accident, and Commission of a
Felony

When you sign a Maryland's driver license or learner's permit application, you agree to certain
conditions. If a police officer thinks you are driving drunk or on drugs, you agree to a Blood Alcohol
Concentration (BAC) test.

If your BAC test shows any detectable amount of alcohol under 0.04%, this will:

    · Put you out-of-service for 24 hours.

If your BAC test shows an alcohol concentration of 0.04% or more when driving a Commercial
Motor Vehicle, this will:

    · Disqualify you from driving a commercial motor vehicle for one year if this was your first
         offense,

    · Disqualify you from driving a commercial vehicle for three years if the vehicle was required to
         be placarded for HAZMAT

    · Disqualify you from driving a commercial vehicle for life if this was a second offense.

27              Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
If your BAC test shows an alcohol concentration of 0.08% or more while operating on a
commercial driver license, regardless of the vehicle type, this will:

    · Disqualify you from driving a commercial motor vehicle for one year if this is your first offense,
         and;

    · Disqualify you for life if this is your second offense.

Implied Consent:

If a police officer asks you to take a BAC test, you must agree to take it.

    · A breath test is used to check alcohol concentration, unless:
             o the driver or other persons need medical treatment for serious or life-threatening injury
             o the test equipment is unavailable.

    · In these cases, a blood test will be used instead.
    · A test to determine drug or controlled substances is always a blood test.

If you refuse to take a test, this will:

    · Disqualify you from driving a commercial motor vehicle for one year if this is your first offense,
         and

    · Disqualify you for life if this is your second offense.

You will lose your CDL for at least one year for a first offense for:

    · Driving a CMV under the influence of alcohol.
    · Driving any vehicle while under the influence of a controlled substance.
    · Leaving the scene of a crash involving a CMV.
    · Committing a felony involving the use of a CMV.
    · Driving a CMV when the CDL is suspended.
    · Causing a fatality through negligent operation of a CMV. Negligent operation includes driving

         in a way that is reckless and puts other people and property in danger.

You will lose your CDL for at least three years if the offense occurs while you are operating a CMV
that is placarded for hazardous materials.

You will lose your CDL for life for a second offense.

You will lose your CDL for life if you use a CMV to commit a felony involving controlled substances.

1.4.3 ­ Serious Traffic Violations

Serious traffic violations are:

28  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
    · excessive speeding (driving 15 mph or more above the posted limit)
    · reckless driving
    · improper or erratic lane changes
    · following a vehicle too closely
    · traffic offenses committed in a CMV in connection with fatal traffic accidents
    · driving a CMV without getting a CDL or having a CDL in the driver's possession and
    · driving a CMV without the proper class of CDL or endorsements.

You will lose your CDL:

    · For at least 60 days if you have committed two serious traffic violations within a three-year
         period involving a CMV.

    · For at least 120 days for three or more serious traffic violations within a three-year period
         involving a CMV.

1.4.4 ­ Violation of Out-of-Service Orders

An out-of-service order means a driver, vehicle, or motor carrier operation is not safe and
cannot be on the road until the problems are fixed.

You will lose your CDL:

    · For at least 90 days if you have committed your first violation of an out-of-service order.
    · For at least one year if you have committed two violations of an out-of-service order in a ten-

         year period.
    · For at least three years if you have committed three or more violations of an out-of-service

         order in a ten-year period.

1.4.5 ­ Railroad-highway Grade Crossing Violations

All CMV vehicles in Maryland are required to stop at every railroad highway grade crossing. There
are four types of violations which can happen at a railroad-highway grade crossing:

    · Failing to stop before driving onto the crossing.
    · Failing to have sufficient space to drive completely through the crossing without stopping.
    · Failing to obey a traffic control device or the directions of an enforcement official at the

         crossing.
    · Failing to negotiate a crossing because of insufficient undercarriage clearance.

You will lose your CDL:

    · For at least 60 days for your first violation.

29  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
    · For at least 120 days for your second violation within a three-year period.
    · For at least one year for your third violation within a three-year period.

1.4.6 ­ Hazardous Materials Endorsement Background Check
and Disqualifications

If you need a hazardous materials endorsement, you must submit your fingerprints and undergo a
background check. You will be denied or lose your hazardous materials endorsement if you:

    · Are not a lawful permanent resident of the United States.
    · Renounce your United States citizenship.
    · Are wanted or under indictment for certain felonies.
    · Have a conviction in military or civilian court for certain felonies.
    · Have been legally declared mentally incompetent or have been involuntarily committed to a

         mental health facility as stated in Title 49 CFR 1572.109 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
         Regulations (FMCSR).
    · Are considered to pose a security threat as determined by the Transportation Security
         Administration.

If you need a TSA Background check and fingerprint services, you can schedule an appointment
at https://mymva.maryland.gov/go/web/AddAppointment.

Select "Commercial Driver's License Services," then "Add/Renew a CDL Hazmat Endorsement."

Hazmat fingerprinting and background checks are only available at MDOT MVA branch offices in
Glen Burnie, Bel Air, Frederick, Salisbury, or Waldorf.

1.4.7 ­ Traffic Violations in Your Personal Vehicle

You will be disqualified from operating a commercial motor vehicle if you have been convicted of
certain types of moving violations in your personal vehicle:

    · If your privilege to drive your personal vehicle is revoked, cancelled, or suspended because of
         violations of traffic control laws (other than parking violations), you will also lose your CDL
         driving privileges.

    · If your privilege to drive your personal vehicle is revoked, cancelled, or suspended because of
         alcohol, controlled substance or felony violations, you will lose your CDL for 1 year.

    · If you are convicted of a second violation in your personal vehicle or CMV, you will lose your
         CDL for life.

    · If your license to drive your personal vehicle is revoked, cancelled, or suspended, you may not
         get a "hardship" license to operate a CMV.

30  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
    · If you are required to operate a vehicle equipped with an interlock, you will be disqualified from
         driving a CMV. You cannot put an interlock device on a CMV.

1.5 ­ Other CDL Rules

All states are connected to one computerized system to share information about CDL drivers. There
are other federal and state rules that affect drivers operating CMVs in all states. Some of them are:

    · You cannot have more than one license.
    · Your employer may not let you drive a commercial motor vehicle if you have more than one

         license or if your CDL is suspended or revoked. A court may fine the employer up to $5,000 or
         put them in jail for breaking this rule.
    · You must notify your employer within 30 days of conviction of any traffic violations (except
         parking). This is true no matter what type of vehicle you were driving.
    · You must notify your employer within two business days if your license is suspended, revoked,
         or canceled, or if you are disqualified from driving.
    · You must give your employer information on all driving jobs you have held for the past 10
         years. You must do this when you apply for a commercial driving job.
    · You cannot drive a commercial motor vehicle without a CDL.
    · If you have a hazardous materials endorsement, you must notify the state that issued your
         CDL and surrender your hazardous materials endorsement within 24 hours if any of the
         following apply:

             o You are convicted, indicted or found not guilty by reason of insanity in any jurisdiction,
                  civilian or military for a disqualifying crime listed in Title 49 CFR 1572.103 of the Federal
                  Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR).

             o You are legally declared mentally incompetent or have been involuntarily committed to a
                  mental institution as stated in Title 49 CFR 1572.109 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
                  Regulations (FMCSR).

             o You renounce your U.S. citizenship.
    · When driving, you cannot hold a mobile phone to make a call or press more than one button to

         dial a call.
    · You are not allowed to send or read text messages while driving.
    · You must always wear a seatbelt while operating a CMV. If you don't wear a seatbelt, you are

         four times more likely to be fatally injured if you are thrown from the vehicle.

31  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
1.6 ­ International Registration Plan and International
Fuel Tax Agreement

The International Registration Plan (IRP) and the International Fuel Tax Agreement (IFTA) are
programs that collect and distribute vehicle license fees and motor fuels taxes for CMVs
traveling through the 48 contiguous United States and 10 Canadian provinces.

If you operate a CDL-required vehicle in interstate commerce, you must register it under the IRP
and the IFTA. There are some exceptions to this rule for vehicles that are government-owned,
recreational vehicles, and vehicles with restricted plates. The IRP registrant and the IFTA licensee
may be the vehicle owner or the vehicle operator.

The 48 American states and 10 Canadian provinces are all individual jurisdictions of the IRP. Under
the IRP, jurisdictions must:

    · Register vehicles. This process includes issuing license plates and cab cards or proper
         credentials.

    · Calculate, collect, and distribute IRP fees
    · Audit carriers for accuracy of reported distance and fees and
    · Enforce IRP requirements.

The base jurisdiction is the US state or Canadian province where a motor carrier has established
their place of business or residency and where their CMVs are registered.

As a registrant, you have several responsibilities under the IRP including:

    · applying for registration with base jurisdiction,
    · providing proper documentation for registration,
    · paying appropriate registration fees,
    · properly displaying registration credentials,
    · maintaining accurate distance records,
    · and making records available for jurisdiction review.

The basic concept behind IFTA is to allow a licensee (motor carrier) to license in a base jurisdiction
for the reporting and payment of motor fuel use taxes.

Under the IFTA, a licensee is given one set of credentials which will let them operate through all IFTA
member jurisdictions.

The fuel use taxes collected under the IFTA are calculated based on the distance traveled and the
volume of fuel consumed in the member jurisdictions.

The licensee files one quarterly tax return with the base jurisdiction by which the licensee will report
all operations through all IFTA member jurisdictions.

32  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
It is the base jurisdiction's responsibility to pay the taxes collected to other member jurisdictions and
to represent the other member jurisdictions in the tax collection process. This includes audits.

An IFTA licensee must keep records to support the information reported on the IFTA quarterly tax
return

The requirement for getting IRP plates for a vehicle and IFTA license for a motor carrier is determined
by the definitions from the IRP Plan and the IFTA for Qualified Vehicle and Qualified Motor Vehicle:

For Purposes of IRP:

A Qualified Vehicle is (except as provided below) any Power Unit used or intended for use in two or
more member jurisdictions and used for the transportation of persons for hire or designed, used, or
maintained primarily for the transportation of property, and:

    · has two Axles and a Gross Vehicle Weight or registered Gross Vehicle Weight more than
         26,000 pounds (11,793.401 kilograms), or

    · has three or more axles, regardless of weight, or
    · is used in combination, and the Gross Vehicle Weight of the combination is more than 26,000

         pounds (11,793.401 kilograms).

While similar, the Qualified Motor Vehicle in IFTA means a motor vehicle used, designed, or
maintained for transportation of persons or property and:

    · Having two axles and a gross vehicle weight or registered gross vehicle weight exceeding
         26,000 pounds or 11,793 kilograms; or

    · is used in combination, when the weight of such combination exceeds 26,000 pounds or
         11,793 kilograms gross vehicle or registered gross vehicle weight. Qualified Motor Vehicle
         does not include recreational vehicles.

If your vehicle is registered under IRP and you are a motor carrier licensed under IFTA, then you
must follow the mandatory record keeping requirements for operating the vehicle.

A universally accepted method of capturing this information is using an Individual Vehicle Distance
Record (IVDR), sometimes referred to as a Driver Trip Report. This document shows the distance
traveled and fuel purchased for a vehicle that operates interstate under IRP registration and IFTA fuel
tax credentials.

Although the actual format of the IVDR may vary, the information it needs for record keeping does
not.

To meet the requirements for IVDR, you must include the following information:

    · Distance: Per Article IV of the IRP Plan
             o Date of trip (starting and ending)
             o Trip origin and destination ­ City and State or Province
             o Route(s) of travel

33  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
             o Beginning and ending odometer or hubometer reading of the trip
             o Total distance traveled
             o Distance traveled In-Jurisdiction
             o Power unit number or vehicle identification number.
    · Fuel: Per Section P560 of the IFTA Procedures Manual. An acceptable receipt or invoice must
         include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
             o Date of purchase
             o Seller's name and address
             o Number of gallons or liters purchased
             o Fuel type
             o Price per gallon or liter or total amount of sale
             o Unit number or another unique vehicle identifier
             o Purchaser's name

An example of an IVDR that must be completed in its entirety for each trip can be found in Figure 1.4
below. One IVDR should be filled out for only one vehicle. The rules to follow when trying to
determine how and when to log an odometer reading are the following:

    · At the beginning of the day
    · When leaving the state or province
    · At the end of the trip/day

You must document fuel purchases. You must get a receipt for all fueling and include it with your
completed IVDR.

Make sure any trips you enter are always filled out in descending order.

Make sure your trips include all states/provinces you traveled through on your route.

There are different routes you can take, and most of the miles may be within one state or province. All
information for the trip must be recorded, no matter how far or how many jurisdictions you travel
through. This includes the dates, routes, odometer readings, and fuel purchases. By completing the
IVDR and keeping all required records, you will keep you and your company in compliance with all
State and Provincial laws surrounding fuel and distance record keeping.

The IVDR is the source document for calculating fees and taxes owed to the jurisdictions where the
vehicle is operated, so these original records must be maintained for at least four years.

These records are subject to audit by the taxing jurisdictions. Failure to maintain complete and
accurate records could result in fines, penalties and suspension or revocation of IRP registrations and
IFTA licenses.

For more information on the IRP and the requirements related to the IRP, contact your base
jurisdiction motor vehicle department or IRP, Inc., the official repository for the IRP. More information

34  Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
can be found on the IRP, Inc. website at www.irponline.org. There is a training video on the website
home page available in English, Spanish and French.

For more information on IFTA and its requirements, contact the appropriate agency in your base
jurisdiction. For Maryland, that is the MVA. You will also find useful information about the Agreement
at the official repository of IFTA at http://www.iftach.org/index.php.

                               Individual Vehicle Mileage & Fuel Record (Example)

    Figure 1.4

35              Section 1: What You Need to Get Your CDL
Section 2: Knowledge Test Background

This Section Covers:

    4. Vehicle Inspection
    5. Basic Control of Your Vehicle
    6. Shifting Gears
    7. Looking Ahead
    8. Communicating
    9. Controlling Your Speed
    10. Managing Space
    11. Seeing Hazards
    12. Distracted Driving
    13. Aggressive Drivers/Road Rage
    14. Night Driving & Driver Fatigue
    15. Driving in Fog
    16. Winter Driving
    17. Hot Weather Driving
    18. Railroad-highway Crossings
    19. Mountain Driving
    20. Driving Emergencies
    21. Anti-Lock Braking Systems
    22. Skid Control and Recovery
    23. Accident Procedures
    24. Fires
    25. Alcohol, Other Drugs, and Driving
    26. Hazardous Materials Rules

This section has information about safe driving all commercial drivers should know. Learning the
information in this section will help you pass the general knowledge every CDL driver must take
before getting their license.

This section has basic information on hazardous materials (HazMat) that all drivers should know. If
you need a HazMat endorsement, you should study Section 9.

This section does not have specific information on the tests for air brakes, combination vehicles,
doubles, or passenger vehicles. Section 11 will have more information about vehicle inspections. To
prepare for the Vehicle Inspection Test, you must also know that information.

36  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.1 ­ Vehicle Inspection

2.1.1 ­ Why Inspect Your Vehicle?

    · Safety ­ The most important reason to inspect your vehicle is to be safe for you and
         others on the road.

    · Money ­ Finding a vehicle defect can save money and problems later.
    · Federal and state law

Safety is the most important reason you should inspect your vehicle. Making sure your vehicle is in
good working order makes sure you and other road users are safe.

Finding a vehicle defect during an inspection could save you problems later. A defect could cause
your vehicle to break down on the road, which will cost time and money. Even worse, a defect could
cause a crash, putting you and others on the road in danger.

Federal and state laws require drivers to inspect their vehicles. Federal and state inspectors also may
inspect your vehicles. If they judge the vehicle to be unsafe, they will put it out of service until it is
fixed. This means you will not be able to drive your vehicle and could be fined until the issue is fixed.

2.1.2 ­ Types of Vehicle Inspection

Vehicle Inspection ­ A vehicle inspection will help you find problems that could cause a crash or
breakdown.

Before a Trip ­ You should always inspect your vehicle before starting a trip.

During a Trip ­ For safety you should do several things to make sure your vehicle continues to be
safe:

    · Watch gauges for signs of trouble.
    · Use your senses to check for problems (look, listen, smell, feel).
    · Check these critical items when you stop:

             o Tires, wheels, and rims.
             o Brakes.
             o Lights and reflectors.
             o Brake and electrical connections to trailer.
             o Trailer coupling devices.
             o Cargo securement devices.

37  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
After-trip Inspection and Report ­ You should do an after-trip inspection. This should be done on
each vehicle you operate. It may include filling out a vehicle condition report listing any problems you
find. The inspection report helps a motor carrier know when the vehicle needs repairs.

2.1.3 ­ What Should You Look For?

TIRE PROBLEMS
    · Too much or too little air pressure
    · Bad wear
             o You need at least 4/32-inch tread depth in every major groove on front tires.
             o You need 2/32 inch on other tires.
             o No fabric should show through the tread or sidewall.
    · Cuts or other damage
    · Tread separation
    · Dual tires that come in contact with each other or parts of the vehicle
    · Mismatched sizes
    · Radial and bias ply tires used together.
    · Cut or cracked valve stems.
    · The tires on the front wheels of a bus must not be re-grooved, recapped, or retreaded.

WHEEL AND RIM PROBLEMS
    · Damaged rims.
    · Rust around wheel nuts may mean the nuts are loose--check tightness. After a tire has been
         changed, stop a short while later and re-check tightness of nuts.
    · Missing clamps, spacers, studs, or lugs means danger.
    · Mismatched, bent, or cracked lock rings are dangerous.
    · Wheels or rims that have had welding repairs are not safe.

BAD BRAKE DRUMS OR SHOES
    · Cracked drums.
    · No loose or missing bolts.
    · Shoes or pads with oil, grease, or brake fluid on them.
    · Shoes worn dangerously thin, missing, or broken.

38  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
STEERING SYSTEM DEFECTS

    · Missing nuts, bolts, cotter keys, or other parts.

    · Bent, loose, or broken parts, such as steering column, steering gear box, or tie rods.

    · If your vehicle is power steering equipped, check hoses, pumps, and fluid level; check for
         leaks.

    · Steering wheel play of more than 10 degrees (approximately 2 inches movement at the rim of
         a 20-inch steering wheel) can make it hard to steer. See Figure 2.1

                                                             Figure 2.1

SUSPENSION SYSTEM DEFECTS
The suspension system holds up the vehicle and its load. It keeps the axles in place. This means
broken suspension parts can be extremely dangerous. To check for problems with the suspension
system, you should look for:

    · Spring hangers that allow movement of the axle from the correct position. See Figure 2.2.

39  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
                                                            Figure 2.2

    · Cracked or broken spring hangers.
             o Missing or broken leaves in any leaf spring. If more than ¼ of the leaves in a spring are
                 broken, the vehicle may be taken "out of service". Any defect could be dangerous. See
                 Figure 2.3.

    Figure 2.3

40              Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Broken leaves in a multi-leaf spring or leaves that have shifted so they might hit a tire or
        other part.

    · Leaking shock absorbers.

    · Torque rod or arm, u-bolts, spring hangers, or other axle positioning parts that are cracked,
        damaged, or missing.

    · Air suspension systems that are damaged or leaking. See Figure 2.4.

                                                             Figure 2.4

    · Any loose, cracked, broken, or missing frame members.

EXHAUST SYSTEM DEFECTS
A broken exhaust system can let poison fumes into the cab or sleeper berth. To check for problems
with the exhaust system look for:

    · Loose, broken, or missing exhaust pipes, mufflers, tailpipes, or vertical stacks.
    · Loose, broken, or missing mounting brackets, clamps, bolts, or nuts.
    · Exhaust system parts rubbing against fuel system parts, tires, or other moving parts

         of the vehicle.
    · Exhaust system parts that are leaking.

EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT
Vehicles must be equipped with emergency equipment. To make sure the emergency equipment is
correct, look for:

41  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Fire extinguisher(s).
    · Spare electrical fuses (unless equipped with circuit breakers).
    · Warning devices for parked vehicles: three reflective triangles or at least 6 fuses or 3 liquid

         burning flares).

CARGO (TRUCKS)

You must make sure the truck is not overloaded, and the cargo is balanced and secured before each
trip. If the cargo contains hazardous materials, you must inspect for proper papers and placarding.

2.1.4 ­ CDL Vehicle Inspection Test

To get a CDL, you must pass a vehicle inspection test. You will be tested to see if you know if your
vehicle is safe to drive. You will be asked to do a vehicle inspection of your vehicle. You must point to
or touch and name each item you are inspecting and explain to the examiner what you would inspect
for that part and why. The next section has 7 steps that will be helpful in learning how to do a
vehicle inspection.

2.1.5 ­ The Seven-Step Inspection Method

METHOD OF INSPECTION

You should do a vehicle inspection the same way each time, so you will learn all the steps and be
less likely to forget something. You need to check the condition of the different parts of your vehicle.
This means checking to make sure the parts are working correctly and are not broken, out of place,
or missing.

Approaching the Vehicle:

    · Pay attention to the general condition.
    · Look for damage or if the vehicle is leaning to one side.
    · Look under the vehicle for fresh oil, coolant, grease, or fuel leaks.
    · Check the area around the vehicle for hazards to vehicle movement (people, other vehicles,

         objects, low-hanging wires, limbs, etc.).

VEHICLE INSPECTION GUIDE

Step 1: Review Last Vehicle Inspection Report

You may have to write a vehicle inspection report each day. The motor carrier must repair any items
in the report that affect safety and certify in the report that repairs were made or unnecessary.

If the report said there were defects, you will need to sign the report.

42  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
If no defects were found, you will not need to sign the report.

If you find anything unsafe during the Vehicle Inspection, get it fixed. Federal and state laws forbid
operating an unsafe vehicle.

Step 2: Check Engine Compartment

Check that the parking brakes are on or wheels are chocked.

You may have to raise the hood, tilt the cab (be sure to secure loose things first, so they don't fall and
break something), or open the engine's compartment door.

Check the following:

    · Engine oil level.
    · Coolant level in radiator; condition of hoses.
    · Power steering fluid level; hose condition (if so equipped).
    · Windshield washer fluid level.
    · Battery fluid level, connections and tie downs (battery may be located elsewhere)
    · Automatic transmission fluid level (may require engine to be running).
    · Check each belt for tightness and excessive wear (alternator, water pump, air compressor)

             o NOTE: Learn how much "give" the belts should have when correctly adjusted.
    · Leaks in the engine compartment (fuel, coolant, oil, power steering fluid, hydraulic fluid, battery

         fluid).
    · Cracked, worn electrical wiring insulation.

When you're done checking the engine compartment, lower and secure the hood, cab, or engine
compartment door.

Step 3: Start the Engine and Inspect Inside the Cab
    · Make sure the parking brake is on.
    · Put the gearshift in neutral (or "park" if automatic).
    · Start the engine and listen for unusual noises.

If the vehicle has one equipped, check the Anti-lock Braking System (ABS) indicator lights. A light on
the dash should come on and then turn off. If it stays on, the ABS is not working properly. For trailers
only, if the yellow light on the left rear of the trailer stays on, the ABS is not working properly. When
you inspect the inside of the cab, you need to look at the gauges, check the condition of the controls,
check your mirrors and windshield, and check your emergency equipment.

Step 3a) Look at the Gauges

    · Oil pressure ­ It should come up to normal within seconds after the engine is started. See
         Figure 2.5

43  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Air pressure ­ Pressure should build from 50 to 90 psi within 3 minutes. Build air pressure to
        the governor cut-out (usually around 120 ­ 140 psi.) Know your vehicle's requirements.

    · Ammeter or voltmeter ­ Should be in normal range(s).

    · Coolant temperature ­ Should begin a gradual rise to normal operating range.

    · Engine oil temperature ­ Should begin a gradual rise to normal operating range.

    · Warning lights and buzzers ­ Oil, coolant, charging circuit warning, and antilock brake
        system lights should go out right away.

    Figure 2.5

Step 3b) Check the Condition of the Controls.

Check all the following for looseness, sticking, damage, or improper setting:

    · Steering wheel.
    · Clutch.
    · Accelerator ("gas pedal").
    · Brake controls.
    · Foot brake.
    · Trailer brake (if your vehicle has one).
    · Parking brake.
    · Retarder controls (if your vehicle has them).
    · Transmission controls.

44              Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Interaxle differential lock (if your vehicle has one).
    · Horn(s).
    · Windshield wiper/washer.
    · Lights. Headlights. Dimmer switch. Turn signal.
    · Four-way flashers.
    · Light switches for:

             o Parking lamps,
             o clearance lamps,
             o identification lamps,

Step 3c) Check Mirrors and Windshield.

Inspect all mirrors and the windshield for cracks, dirt, illegal stickers, or other causes to make seeing
more difficult. Clean and adjust the mirrors and windows if that is needed.

Step 3d) Check Emergency Equipment

Check for the following safety equipment items:

    · Spare electrical fuses (unless the vehicle has circuit breakers).
    · Three red reflective triangles or three liquid burning flares.
    · Properly charged and rated fire extinguisher.

Step 3e) Check the Safety Belt.

Check that the safety belt is securely mounted, is adjustable, latches properly, and is not ripped or
frayed.

Step 4: Turn Off the Engine and Check the Vehicle's Lights

Make sure the parking brake is set, turn off the engine, and take the key with you. Turn on headlights
(low beams) and four-way emergency flashers and get out of the vehicle.

Step 5: Do Walk-around Inspection General Inspection of the Lights

Go to the front of the vehicle and check that low beams are on and both four-way flashers are
working.

    · Push the dimmer switch and check that the high beams work.
    · Turn off the headlights and the four-way emergency flashers.
    · Turn on parking, clearance, side-marker, and identification lights.
    · Turn on the right turn signal and start a walk-around inspection.

45  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
General Inspection of the Entire Vehicle:

    · Walk around and inspect everything. Review all lights, reflectors, and glass as you go along.
         Clean the lights, reflectors, and glass as needed.

On the Left Front Side:

    · Driver's door glass should be clean.
    · Door latches and locks should all work properly.
    · Check the condition of the left front wheel and rim:

             o look that it isn't missing, bent, has broken studs, clamps, lugs, or has any signs of
                  misalignment.

    · Check the condition of the tires:
             o they should be properly inflated,
             o the valve stem and cap are in good condition,
             o there are no serious cuts,
             o bulges, or
             o tread wear.

    · Review the condition of the lug nuts.
             o Use a wrench to test rust-streaked lug nuts since this could be a sign of looseness.

    · Check the hub oil level is OK and there are no leaks.
    · Check the left front suspension.
    · Check the condition of spring, spring hangers, shackles, u-bolts.
    · Check the shock absorber condition.
    · Check the left front brake.
    · Check the condition of the brake drum or disc.
    · Check the condition of the hoses.

Front:

    · Check the condition of the front axle.
    · Check the condition of the steering system.
    · Check that there are no loose, worn, bent, damaged or missing parts.
    · Check the steering mechanism to test for looseness.
    · Check the condition of the windshield for damage and clean if dirty.
    · Check windshield wiper arms for proper spring tension.
    · Check wiper blades for damage, "stiff" rubber, and make sure they are secure.
    · Check the lights and reflectors.

46  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Check that parking, clearance, and identification lights are clean, operating, and proper color
         (amber at front).

    · Check that reflectors are clean and have a proper color (amber at front).
    · Check that the right front turn signal light is clean, operating, and proper color (amber or white

         on signals facing forward).

On the Right Front Side:

    · On the right front you will check all the items as done on the left front.

On the Right Side:

    · Primary and secondary safety cab locks engaged (if cab-over-engine design).
    · Check the Right fuel tanks are securely mounted and are not damaged or leaking.
    · Check that the Fuel crossover line is secure.
    · Check that the Tank(s) have enough fuel and cap(s) are on and secure.

Check the Condition of All Visible Parts:

    · Check that the rear of the engine is not leaking.
    · Check that the transmission is not leaking.
    · Check that the exhaust system is secure, not leaking, not touching wires, fuel, or air-lines.
    · Check that the frame and cross members have no bends or cracks.
    · Check the air-lines and electrical wiring are secured against snagging, rubbing, wearing.
    · Check the spare tire carrier or rack is not damaged (if your vehicle has one).
    · Check the spare tire or wheel is securely mounted in the rack.
    · Check the spare tire and wheel are the right size and have enough air.
    · Check all cargo is properly blocked, braced, balanced, tied, or chained, and is the right weight

         limit for that vehicle to keep it from moving while the vehicle is in motion.
    · If a header board is required, check that it is adequate and secure.
    · Check the side boards, stakes strong enough, free of damage, properly set in place (if so

         equipped).
    · If canvas or tarp is needed, check it is properly secured to prevent tearing, billowing, or

         blocking of mirrors.
    · Check curbside cargo compartment doors are in good condition, securely closed, latched or

         locked and all required security seals in place.
    · If your vehicle is oversize, check that all required signs (flags, lamps, and reflectors) are safely

         and properly mounted and you have all required permits.

Right Rear:

47  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Check the condition of wheels and rims--no missing, bent, or broken spacers, studs, clamps,
         or lugs.

    · Check the condition of tires--properly inflated, valve stems and caps OK, no serious cuts,
         bulges, tread wear, tires not rubbing each other, and nothing stuck between them.

    · Check the tires are of the same type. (not mixed radial and bias types).
    · Check the tires evenly matched (same sizes). Wheel bearing/seals not leaking.
    · Check the suspension.
    · Check the condition of spring(s), spring hangers, shackles, and u-bolts.
    · Check the sale secure.
    · Check the powered axle(s) not leaking lube (gear oil).
    · Check the condition of torque rod arms and bushings.
    · Check the condition of the shock absorber(s).
    · If a retractable axle is equipped, check the condition of the lift mechanism. If it is air powered,

         check for leaks.
    · Check the condition of air ride components.
    · Check the brake adjustment.
    · Check the condition of brake drum(s) or discs.
    · Check the condition of hoses--look for any wear due to rubbing.
    · Check the lights and reflectors.
    · Check the side-marker lights are clean, operating, and proper color (red at rear, others amber).
    · Check the side-marker reflectors clean and proper color (red at rear, others amber).

Rear:

    · Check the lights and reflectors.
    · Rear clearance and identification lights should be:

             o clean,
             o operating,
             o and proper color (red at rear).
    · Reflectors should be:
             o clean
             o and proper color (red at rear).
    · Tail lights should be:
             o clean,
             o operating,
             o and proper color (red at rear).

48  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Right rear turn signal should be:
             o operating
             o and the proper color (red, yellow, or amber at rear).

    · License plate(s) should be:
             o present,
             o clean,
             o and secured.

    · Splash guards should be:
             o Present
             o Not damaged,
             o Properly fastened,
             o Not dragging on ground or rubbing tires.

    · Cargo should be secure.
    · Cargo should be properly blocked, braced, tied, chained, etc.
    · Tailboards should be up and properly secured.
    · End gates should be free of damage, properly secured in stake sockets.
    · Canvas or tarp (if needed) properly secured to prevent tearing, billowing, or blocking of either

         the rearview mirrors or rear lights.
    · If your vehicle is over-length or over-width, make sure all signs and other lights/flags are safely

         and properly mounted and all required permits are in your possession.
    · Rear doors should be securely closed, latched/locked.

Left Side:

Check all items as done on right side, plus:

    · Any battery (if not mounted in the engine compartment).
    · Any battery box securely mounted to vehicle. Box has a secure cover.
    · All batteries are secured against movement.
    · Batteries are not broken or leaking.
    · Fluid in batteries is at proper level (except maintenance-free type).
    · Cell caps are present and securely tightened (except maintenance-free type).
    · Vents in cell caps are free of foreign material (except maintenance-free type).

Step 6: Check Signal Lights

Get in your vehicle and turn off all lights.

    · Turn on stop lights (apply trailer hand brake or have a helper put on the brake pedal).

49  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Turn on left turn signal lights.
    · Get out and check lights:

             o Left front turn signal light should be:
                          clean
                          operating
                          and proper color (amber or white on signals facing the front).

             o Left rear turn signal light should be:
                          clean,
                          operating,
                          and proper color (red, yellow, or amber).

             o Both stop lights should be:
                          clean,
                          operating,
                          and proper color (red, yellow, or amber).

Get back in your vehicle.

    · Turn off lights not needed for driving.
    · Check for all required papers, trip manifests, permits, etc.
    · Secure all loose items in the cab (they might interfere with operation of the controls or hit you

         in a crash).
    · Start the engine.

Step 7: Start the Engine and Check the Brake System

Test for hydraulic leaks.

    · If the vehicle has hydraulic brakes, pump the brake pedal three times. Then apply firm
         pressure to the pedal and hold for five seconds. The pedal should not move. If it does, there
         may be a leak or other problem. Get it fixed before driving.

    · If the vehicle has air brakes, do the checks described in Sections 5 and 6 of this manual.

BRAKE SYSTEM

Test Parking Brake(s):

    · Fasten your safety belt.
    · Set the parking brake (power unit only)
    · Release the trailer parking brake (if applicable)
    · Place the vehicle into low gear.

50  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Gently pull forward against the parking brake to make sure the parking brake holds.
    · Repeat the same steps for the trailer with trailer parking brake set and power unit parking

         brakes released (if applicable).
    · If it doesn't hold the vehicle, it is faulty; do not drive.
Test the Service Brake Stopping Action:

    · Start driving and get up to about five miles per hour.
    · Push down the brake pedal firmly.
    · If the vehicle begins "pulling" to one side or the other this can mean brake trouble.
    · Any unusual brake pedal "feel" or if there is a delay in the stopping action, this can mean

         trouble.

2.1.6 ­ Inspection During a Trip

CHECK YOUR VEHICLE OPERATION REGULARLY
You should check all the following parts of your vehicle on each trip:

    · All of your instruments.
    · Air pressure gauge (if you have air brakes).
    · Temperature gauges.
    · Pressure gauges.
    · Ammeter/voltmeter.
    · Mirrors.
    · Tires.
    · Cargo and cargo covers.
    · Lights, etc.
If you see, hear, smell, or feel anything that might mean trouble, check it out.

SAFETY INSPECTION
Drivers of trucks and truck tractors when transporting cargo must inspect the securement
of the cargo:

    · Within the first 50 miles of a trip; and
    · Every 150 miles or every three hours (whichever comes first).

51  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.1.7 ­ After-trip Inspection and Report

You may have to make a written report each day on the condition of the vehicle(s) you drove. You will
need to report anything that could be a safety problem, or that could possibly cause a mechanical
breakdown. This report is then given to the motor carrier or owner or operator of the vehicle.

The vehicle inspection report tells the motor carrier about problems that may need fixing. The motor
carrier will tell you what issues need to be fixed with your vehicle. Keep a copy of your report in the
vehicle for one day. That way, the next driver can learn about any problems you have found.

Subsection 2.1 Test Your Knowledge

    1. What is the most important reason for doing a vehicle inspection?
    2. What things should you check during a trip?
    3. Name some key steering system parts.
    4. Name some suspension system defects.
    5. What three kinds of emergency equipment must you have?
    6. What is the minimum tread depth for front tires? For other tires?
    7. Name some things you should check on the front of your vehicle during the walk around

         inspection.
    8. What should wheel bearing seals be checked for?
    9. How many red reflective triangles should you carry?
    10. How do you test hydraulic brakes for leaks?
    11. Why put the ignition key in your pocket during the vehicle inspection?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsection 2.1.

2.2 ­ Learning Basic Control of Your Vehicle

To drive a vehicle safely, you must be able to control its speed and direction. Safe operation of a
commercial vehicle requires skill in:

    · Accelerating.
    · Steering.
    · Stopping.
    · Backing up.

52                                            Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
Always fasten your seatbelt when you are on the road. Always apply the parking brake when you
leave your vehicle.

2.2.1 ­ Accelerating Safely

When you first start your vehicle, you will need to make sure it doesn't roll back when it is put into
gear or when you release the parking brake. If the vehicle rolls back, you may hit someone behind
you.

If you have a manual transmission vehicle, push the clutch down part of the way before you take your
right foot off the brake. Put on the parking brake anytime you need to keep from rolling back. Release
the parking brake only when you have applied enough engine power to keep from rolling back.

On a tractor-trailer equipped with a trailer brake hand valve, the hand valve can be applied to keep
from rolling back.

Speed up smoothly and gradually so the vehicle does not jerk. Rough acceleration can cause
mechanical damage. When pulling a trailer, rough acceleration can damage the coupling.

When you are driving in rain or snow, or other times when your tires don't have good traction, speed
up very gradually. If you use too much power, the drive wheels may spin. You could lose control. If
the drive wheels begin to spin, take your foot off the accelerator.

2.2.2 ­ Steering Safely and Properly

You should always hold the steering wheel firmly with both hands. Your hands should be on opposite
sides of the wheel. If you hit a curb or a pothole, the wheel could pull away from your hands unless
you have a firm hold onto the steering wheel.

2.2.3 ­ Stopping Safely and Quickly

Anytime you need to stop, push the brake pedal down gradually. How hard you need to push the
brake pedal to stop will depend on how fast you are driving and how quickly you need to stop.

If you are not driving at a high speed, you may not need to push the brake pedal as hard.

If you need to stop quickly, you may need to push the brake pedal down very hard.

Control the pressure so the vehicle comes to a smooth, safe stop. If you have a manual transmission,
push the clutch in when the engine is close to idle.

2.2.4 ­ Backing Up Safely

Backing up is always dangerous because you cannot see everything behind your vehicle. Avoid
backing up whenever you can. When you park, try to park so you will be able to pull forward when
you leave. When you have to back up, here are a few simple safety rules:

53  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Start in the Proper Position ­ Put the vehicle in the best position to allow you to back safely.
        This position will depend on the type of backing to be done.

    · Check Your Path Before You Drive ­ Before you start moving, take a look at where your
        vehicle will go. Get out and walk around the vehicle. Make sure there's enough space on all
        sides and above, both in the path and near where your vehicle will go.

    · Use Mirrors on Both Sides ­ Check the outside mirrors on both sides frequently. Get out of
        the vehicle and check your path if you are unsure.

    · Back Up Slowly ­ Always back as slowly as you can. Use the lowest reverse gear. This
        makes it easier to fix any steering errors and helps you stop quickly if you need to.

    · Back Toward the Driver's Side ­ You can see better when you back up toward the driver's
        side. Backing toward the right side is very dangerous because it is harder to see. If you back
        and turn toward the driver's side, you can watch the rear of your vehicle by looking out the side
        window. Even if you need to go around the block to get in the right position, it's safer and worth
        the extra time.

    · Use a Helper ­ Use a helper when you can. There are blind spots you can't see. That's why a
        helper is important. The helper should stand near the back of your vehicle where you can see
        them. Before you begin backing, discuss and agree on a set of hand signals that you both
        understand. Agree on a signal for "stop."

    · Start in the Proper Position ­ Put the vehicle in the best position to allow you to back safely.
        This position will depend on the type of backing to be done.

    · Use Mirrors on Both Sides ­ Check the outside mirrors on both sides frequently. Get out of
        the vehicle and check your path if you are unsure.

2.3 ­ Shifting Gears Correctly

Shifting gears correctly is important. You will have less control if you can't get your vehicle into the
right gear while driving.

2.3.1 ­ Manual Transmissions and Shifting Gears

BASIC PROCEDURES FOR SHIFTING UP
Upshifting or shifting up means moving to a higher gear. Most heavy vehicles with unsynchronized
manual transmissions require double clutching to change gears. However, double clutching may not
be required if your vehicle is equipped with a synchronized manual transmission. This is the basic
method for double clutching:

    1. Let off the accelerator, push in the clutch and shift to neutral at the same time.
    2. Release clutch while still not pressing the accelerator.

54  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    3. Let engine and gears slow down to the rpm required for the next gear. (Learning how to do this
         takes practice.)

    4. Push in the clutch and shift to the higher gear at the same time. Release clutch and press
         accelerator at the same time.

Shifting gears using double clutching requires practice. If you stay in neutral too long, you may have
difficulty putting the vehicle into the next gear. If this happens, don't try to force it. Return to neutral,
release clutch, increase engine speed to match road speed, and try again.

KNOWING WHEN TO SHIFT UP

There are two ways of knowing when to shift:

    1. Use Your Engine Speed (rpm) ­ Read the driver's manual for your vehicle and learn the
         operating rpm range. Watch your tachometer and shift up when your engine reaches the top of
         the range. Some newer vehicles use "progressive" shifting: the rpm at which you shift
         becomes higher as you move up in the gears.

    2. Use Road Speed (mph) ­ Learn what speeds each gear is good for. Then, by using the
         speedometer, you'll know when to shift up.

With either method, you may learn to use engine sounds to know when to shift.

BASIC PROCEDURES FOR SHIFTING DOWN

Downshifting means moving to a lower gear.

    1. Let off the accelerator, push in the clutch, and shift to neutral at the same time.
    2. Release the clutch.
    3. Press the accelerator, increase engine and gear speed to the rpm required in the lower gear.
    4. Push in the clutch and shift to lower gear at the same time.
    5. Release clutch and press accelerator at the same time.

Downshifting, like upshifting, requires knowing when to shift. Use either the tachometer or the
speedometer and downshift at the right rpm or road speed.

SPECIAL CONDITIONS WHERE YOU SHOULD DOWNSHIFT

Before Starting Down a Hill:
    · Slow down and shift down to a speed that you can control without using the brakes hard.
         Brakes can overheat and lose their braking power when overused.
    · Downshift before starting down the hill. Make sure you are in a low enough gear, usually lower
         than the gear required to climb the same hill.

55  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
Before Entering a Curve:

Slow down to a safe speed and downshift to the right gear before entering the curve. This lets you
use some power through the curve to help the vehicle be more stable while turning. It also lets you
speed up as soon as you are out of the curve.

2.3.2 ­ Multi-speed Rear Axles and Auxiliary Transmissions

Some trucks have special parts that give them extra gears. These include multi-speed rear axles and
extra transmissions. You usually use a knob or switch to control them on the main gearshift lever.
There are many ways of shifting gears. Make sure you learn the right way to shift gears in the vehicle
you will be driving.

2.3.3 ­ Automatic Transmissions

Some vehicles have automatic transmissions. If you are driving a vehicle with an automatic
transmission you may want to use low range to give you extra power and control if you are driving
slowly. This is used for tough driving conditions like going down steep hills, slippery roads, or moving
a heavy load at low speeds. When you're in low range, your truck's gears are set to give more torque
(or pulling power), even though your speed is lower. This helps protect your brakes and engine from
working too hard. It is very important to use this braking technique when going down grades.

Low range can help your truck from rolling too fast downhill, start smoothly on hills or with heavy
loads, and gives you more control in tricky situations.

2.3.4 ­ Using Retarders

Some vehicles have retarders. They help slow your vehicle and can reduce the need for using your
brakes. Retarders reduce wear on the brakes and give you another way to slow down. There are four
basic types of retarders:

    · exhaust,
    · engine,
    · hydraulic, and
    · electric.

All retarders can be turned on or off by the driver. On some vehicles the retarding power can be
adjusted. When turned on, retarders apply their braking power to the drive wheels whenever you let
up on the accelerator pedal all the way.

Because these devices can be noisy, be sure you know where you are allowed to use retarders.

56  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    CAUTION: Retarders should only be used when you are sure your wheels have good
    traction. When your drive wheels have poor traction, the retarder may cause them to skid.
    You should turn the retarder off whenever the road is wet, icy, or snow covered.

Subsections 2.2 and 2.3 Test Your Knowledge

    1. Why should you back up toward the driver's side?
    2. If you are stopped on a hill, how can you start moving without rolling back?
    3. When backing up, why is it important to use a helper?
    4. What's the most important hand signal that you and the helper should agree on?
    5. What are the two special conditions where you should downshift a manual transmission

         vehicle?
    6. When should you downshift automatic transmissions?
    7. Retarders keep you from skidding when the road is slippery. True or False?
    8. What are the two ways to know when to shift?

These questions may be on the test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsections 2.2 and 2.3.

2.4 ­ Looking Ahead and Managing Space

To be a safe driver you need to know what's going on all around your vehicle. Not looking or scanning
ahead far enough is a major cause of crashes.

IMPORTANCE OF LOOKING FAR ENOUGH AHEAD
Stopping or changing lanes can take a lot of distance so knowing what the traffic is doing on all sides
of you is very important. You need to look far ahead on any road to make sure you have room to
make these moves safely.

HOW FAR AHEAD SHOULD YOU LOOK?
To drive safely, you should always look ahead at where you'll be in about 12 to 15 seconds. This
helps you spot problems early and gives you time to slow down or change lanes smoothly.

    · If you are driving in the city, that's about one block ahead.

57  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · On the highway, it's about a quarter mile ahead.

Good drivers don't just stare far ahead all the time. They are keeping their eyes moving, looking,
near, far and checking their mirrors. Scanning like this helps you stay aware of everything around
your vehicle so you are always ready if you need to make quick decisions.

    Figure 2.6

LOOK FOR TRAFFIC

Good drivers will always be looking for other vehicles on the road. Look for vehicles coming onto the
highway, into your lane, or those getting ready to turn. Watch for brake lights from slowing vehicles.
By seeing these things far enough ahead, you can change your speed or change lanes to avoid a
problem. If a traffic light has been green for a long time it will probably change before you get there.
Start slowing down and be ready to stop.

SEEING TO THE SIDES AND REAR

It's important to always know what's going on behind and to the sides of your vehicle. Check your
mirrors regularly. Check more often in special situations which are explained more below.

Adjusting Your Mirrors

You should check your mirror adjustment before starting any trip. To be accurate, you must
check the mirror adjustment when the trailer(s) are straight. You should check and adjust each mirror
to show some part of the vehicle. This will help you understand where other vehicles are by giving
you a clear starting point to compare what you see in your mirrors.

Regular Mirror Checks

You need to check your mirrors often to be aware of traffic and to check your vehicle.

58              Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
Using Mirrors to Monitor Traffic

Check your mirrors for vehicles on either side and behind you. In an emergency, you may need to
know whether you can make a quick lane change. Use your mirrors to spot vehicles who may be
trying to pass you. There are "blind spots" that your mirrors cannot show you. A blind spot is an area
around your vehicle that you can't see by just using your mirrors. Check your mirrors regularly to
know where other vehicles are around you, and to see if they move into your blind spots.

Using Mirrors to Check Your Vehicle

Use the mirrors to keep an eye on your tires. It's one way to spot a tire fire. If you're carrying open
cargo, you can use the mirrors to check that also. Look for loose straps, ropes, or chains. Watch for a
flapping or ballooning tarp.

Using Mirrors in Special Situations

Special situations include:

    · lane changes,
    · turns,
    · merges, and
    · tight maneuvers.

These special situations require more than regular mirror checks.

Using Mirrors for Lane Changes

You need to check your mirrors to make sure no one is alongside you or about to pass you. You
should always check your mirrors in these situations:

    · Before you change lanes to make sure there is enough room.
    · After you have signaled, to check that no one has moved into your blind spot.
    · Right after you start the lane change, to double- check that your path is clear.
    · After you complete the lane change.

Using Your Mirrors When Making Turns

While turning, check your mirrors to make sure the rear of your vehicle will not hit anything.

Using Your Mirrors When Merging

When merging, use your mirrors to make sure the gap in traffic is large enough for your vehicle to
enter safely.

Using Your Mirrors When Making Tight Maneuvers

Any time you are driving in close quarters, check your mirrors often. Make sure you have enough
clearance.

59  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
How to Use Mirrors

Use mirrors correctly by checking them quickly and understanding what you see.

When you check your mirrors while driving on the road, check quickly. Look back and forth between
the mirrors and the road ahead. Don't focus on the mirrors for too long. Otherwise, you will continue
to travel without knowing what is happening ahead.

Many large vehicles have curved mirrors that show a wider area than flat mirrors. These mirrors are
sometimes called convex, fisheye, spot, and bug-eye mirrors. Everything appears smaller in a
convex mirror than it would if you were looking at it directly.

Things also seem farther away than they really are. It's important to realize this and get used to it. It is
important that you get used to how things look in the mirrors of your vehicle. This might be different
for every vehicle you drive.

Figure 2.7 shows the field of vision using a convex mirror.

    Figure 2.7

60              Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.5 ­ Communicating Clearly With Other Drivers

2.5.1 ­ Tell Other Drivers What You Plan to Do

Other drivers can't know what you are going to do until you tell them.

Signaling what you plan to do is important for safety. Here are some general rules for signaling during
specific situations.

TURNS

There are three good rules for using turn signals:

    · Signal early ­ Signal well before you turn. It is the best way to keep others from trying to
         pass you.

    · Signal continuously ­ You need both hands on the wheel to turn safely. Don't cancel the
         signal until you have completed the turn.

    · Cancel your signal ­ Don't forget to turn off your turn signal after you've turned. Even if your
         vehicle has self-canceling signals, you may need to manually turn off the signal depending on
         how sharp the turn was or if there is a defect in the sensor.

LANE CHANGES

Put your turn signal on before changing lanes. Change lanes slowly and smoothly. That way a driver
you didn't see may have a chance to honk their horn, or avoid your vehicle.

SLOWING DOWN

Warn drivers behind you when you see you'll need to slow down. A few light taps on the brake pedal
to flash the brake lights should warn following drivers. Use the four-way emergency flashers for times
when you are driving very slowly or are stopped. Don't stop suddenly. Warn other drivers in any of the
following situations:

TROUBLE AHEAD

The size of your vehicle may make it hard for drivers behind you to see hazards ahead. If you see a
hazard that will require slowing down, warn the drivers behind by flashing your brake lights.

TIGHT TURNS

Most car drivers don't know how slowly you have to go to make a tight turn in a large vehicle. Give
drivers behind you warning by braking early and slowing gradually.

61  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
STOPPING ON THE ROAD

Truck and bus drivers sometimes stop in the roadway to unload cargo or passengers, or to stop at a
railroad crossing. Warn following drivers by flashing your brake lights.

DRIVING SLOWLY

Drivers often do not realize how fast they are catching up to a slow vehicle until they are very close. If
you must drive slowly, alert following drivers by turning on your emergency flashers if it is legal. Laws
regarding the use of flashers differ from one state to another. Check the laws of the states where you
drive.

DON'T DIRECT TRAFFIC

Some drivers try to help others by signaling when it is safe to pass. You should not do this. You could
cause a crash. You could be blamed, and it could cost you.

2.5.2 ­ Communicating Your Presence

Other drivers may not notice your vehicle even when it's in plain sight. To help prevent accidents, let
them know you're there.

WHEN PASSING

Whenever you are about to pass a vehicle, pedestrian, or bicyclist, assume they don't see you. They
could suddenly move in front of you. When it is legal, tap the horn lightly or, at night, flash your lights
from low to high beam and back. Drive carefully enough to avoid a crash even if they don't see or
hear you.

WHEN IT'S HARD TO SEE

When it is dark or nearly dark, in rain, or snow, you should make yourself easier to see. If you are
having trouble seeing other vehicles, other drivers will have trouble seeing you. Turn on your lights.
Use the headlights, not just the identification or clearance lights. Use the low beams; high beams can
bother people in the daytime as well as at night.

WHEN PARKED AT THE SIDE OF THE ROAD

When you pull off the road and stop, be sure to turn on the four- way emergency flashers. This is
important at night. Don't trust the taillights to give warning. Drivers have crashed into the rear of a
parked vehicle because they thought it was moving normally.

If you must stop on a road or the shoulder of any road, you must put out your emergency warning
devices within ten minutes. Place your warning devices at the following locations:

62  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    1. If you must stop on or by a one-way or divided highway, place warning devices 10 feet,
        100 feet, and 200 feet toward the approaching traffic. See Figure 2.8.

                                                            Figure 2.8

    2. If you stop on a two-lane road carrying traffic in both directions or on an undivided highway,
        place warning devices within 10 feet of the front or rear corners to mark the location of the
        vehicle and 100 feet behind and ahead of the vehicle, on the shoulder or in the lane you
        stopped in. See Figure 2.9.

63  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
                                                            Figure 2.9

    3. Back beyond any hill, curve, or other obstruction that prevents other drivers from seeing the
        vehicle within 500 feet. If line of sight view is obstructed due to a hill or curve, move the rear-
        most triangle to a point back down the road so warning is provided. See Figure 2.10.

64  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
                                                            Figure 2.10

When putting out the triangles, hold them between yourself and the oncoming traffic for your own
safety. This will make it easier for other drivers to see you.

USE YOUR HORN WHEN NEEDED
Your horn can let others know you're there. It can help to avoid a crash. Use your horn when needed.
However, it can startle others and could be dangerous when used unnecessarily.

2.6 ­ Controlling Speed

Driving too fast is a major cause of fatal crashes. You must adjust your speed depending on driving
conditions. These include traction, curves, visibility, traffic, and hills.

65  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.6.1 ­ Stopping Distance

To help you know how much distance you will need to safely stop your vehicle, use the
following formula:
Perception Distance + Reaction Distance + Braking Distance = Total Stopping Distance

PERCEPTION DISTANCE
Perception Distance is the distance your vehicle travels, in ideal conditions; from the time your eyes
see a hazard until your brain recognizes it.
Your perception is your ability to see, hear, or recognize something using your senses. Keep in mind
there are mental and physical conditions which can affect your perception of distance. It can be
affected greatly depending on visibility and the hazard itself. The average perception time for an alert
driver is 1¾ seconds. At 55 mph this accounts for 142 feet traveled.

REACTION DISTANCE
Reaction Distance is the distance you will continue to travel, in ideal conditions; before you physically
hit the brakes, in response to a hazard seen ahead.
The average driver has a reaction time of ¾ second to 1 second. At 55 mph this accounts for 61 feet
traveled

BRAKING DISTANCE
Braking Distance is the distance your vehicle will travel, in ideal conditions, while you are braking.
At 55 mph on dry pavement with good brakes, it can take about 216 feet.

TOTAL STOPPING DISTANCE
Total Stopping Distance is the total minimum distance your vehicle has traveled, in ideal conditions;
with everything considered, including perception distance, reaction distance and braking distance,
until you can bring your vehicle to a complete stop.
At 55 mph, your vehicle will travel a minimum of 419 feet. See Figure 2.11.

66  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
                                                            Figure 2.11

THE EFFECT OF SPEED ON STOPPING DISTANCE
The faster you drive, the greater the impact or striking power of your vehicle.
When you double your speed from 20 to 40 mph the impact is 4 times greater. The braking distance
is also 4 times longer.
Triple the speed from 20 to 60 mph and the impact and braking distance is 9 times greater.
Increase the speed to 80 mph and the impact and braking distance are 16 times greater than at 20
mph.
High speeds greatly increase the severity of crashes and stopping distances. By slowing down, you
can reduce braking distance.

THE EFFECT OF VEHICLE WEIGHT ON STOPPING DISTANCE
The heavier the vehicle, the more work the brakes must do to stop it, and the more heat they absorb.
But heavy vehicles have brakes, tires, springs, and shock absorbers which are designed to work best
when the vehicle is fully loaded. Empty trucks need more stopping distance because an empty
vehicle has less traction.

67  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.6.2 ­ Matching Speed to the Road Surface

You can't steer or brake a vehicle unless you have traction. Traction is friction between the tires and
the road. There are some road conditions that reduce traction and call for lower speeds.

SLIPPERY SURFACES
It will take longer to stop, and it will be harder to turn without skidding, when the road is slippery. Wet
roads can double the stopping distance. You must drive slower to be able to stop in the same
distance as on a dry road. Reduce speed by about one-third (e.g., slow from 55 to about 35 mph) on
a wet road. On packed snow, reduce speed by a half, or more. If the surface is icy, reduce speed to a
crawl and stop driving as soon as you can safely do so.

IDENTIFYING SLIPPERY SURFACES
Sometimes it's hard to know if the road is slippery. Here are some signs of slippery roads:

SHADED AREAS
Shady parts of the road will remain icy and slippery long after open areas have melted.

BRIDGES
When the temperature drops, bridges will freeze before the road will. Be especially careful when the
temperature is close to 32 degrees Fahrenheit.

MELTING ICE
Slight melting will make ice wet. Wet ice is much more slippery than ice that is not wet.

BLACK ICE
Black ice is a thin layer that is clear enough that you can see the road underneath it. It makes the
road look wet. Any time the temperature is below freezing and the road looks wet, watch out for black
ice.

VEHICLE ICING
An easy way to check for ice is to open the window and feel the front of the mirror, mirror support, or
antenna. If there's ice on these, the road surface is probably starting to ice up.

68  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
JUST AFTER RAIN BEGINS

Right after it starts to rain, the water mixes with oil left on the road by vehicles. This makes the road
very slippery. If the rain continues, it will wash the oil away.

HYDROPLANING

In some weather, water or slush collects on the road. When your vehicle drives over the collected
water, your vehicle can hydroplane. When a vehicle is hydroplaning, the tires lose their contact with
the road and have little or no traction. You may not be able to steer or brake.

You can regain control by releasing the accelerator and pushing in the clutch. This will slow your
vehicle and let the wheels turn freely. If the vehicle is hydroplaning, do not use the brakes to slow
down. If the drive wheels start to skid, push in the clutch to let them turn freely.

It does not take a lot of water to cause hydroplaning. Hydroplaning can occur at speeds as low as 30
mph if there is a lot of water. Hydroplaning is more likely if tire pressure is low, or the tread is worn.
The grooves in a tire carry away the water. If the grooves aren't deep, they don't work well.

Road surfaces where water can collect can create conditions that cause a vehicle to hydroplane.
Watch for clear reflections, tire splashes, and raindrops on the road. These are signs of standing
water.

2.6.3 ­ Speed and Curves

You need to adjust your speed for curves in the road. Two things can happen if you take a curve too
fast.

First, the tires can lose their traction and continue straight ahead, causing you to skid off the road.

Second, the tires may keep their traction and cause vehicle rollover.

Tests have shown that trucks with a high center of gravity can rollover at the posted speed limit for a
curve. Slow to a safe speed before you enter a curve. Braking in a curve is dangerous because it is
easier to lock the wheels and cause a skid. Slow down as needed. Don't ever exceed the posted
speed limit for the curve. Be in a gear that will let you accelerate slightly in the curve. This will help
you keep control.

2.6.4 ­ Speed and Distance Ahead

You should always be able to stop within the distance you can see ahead. Fog, rain, or other
conditions may require that you slowdown to be able to stop in the distance you can see. At night,
you can't see as far with low beams as you can with high beams. When you must use low beams,
slow down.

69  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.6.5 ­ Speed and Traffic Flow

When you're driving in heavy traffic, the safest speed is the speed of other vehicles. Vehicles going
the same direction at the same speed are not likely to run into one another. In many states, speed
limits are lower for trucks and buses than for cars. It can vary as much as 15 mph. Use extra caution
when you change lanes or pass on these roadways. Drive at the speed of the traffic if you can,
without going at an illegal or unsafe speed. Keep a safe following distance.

The main reason drivers exceed speed limits is to save time. But anyone trying to drive faster than
the speed of traffic will not be able to save much time. The risks involved are not worth it. If you go
faster than the speed of other traffic, you'll have to keep passing other vehicles. This increases the
chance of a crash, and it is more tiring. Fatigue increases the chance of a crash. Going with the flow
of traffic is safer and easier.

2.6.7 ­ Speed on Downgrades

Your vehicle's speed will increase on downgrades because of gravity. The most important thing you
can do is to select and maintain a speed that is not too fast for the:

    · Total weight of the vehicle and cargo.
    · Length of the grade.
    · Steepness of the grade.
    · Road conditions.
    · Weather.

If a speed limit is posted, or there is a sign showing "Maximum Safe Speed," never exceed the speed
shown. Also, look for and heed warning signs showing the length and steepness of the grade.

You must use the braking effect of the engine as the main way of controlling your speed on
downgrades. The braking effect of the engine is greatest when it is near the governed rpms and the
transmission is in the lower gears. Save your brakes so you will be able to slow or stop as required by
road and traffic conditions.

Shift your transmission to a low gear before starting down the grade and use the proper braking
techniques. For more information on safely going down steep downgrades, please read subsection
2.16 Mountain Driving.

2.6.8 ­ Roadway Work Zones

Speeding traffic is the number one cause of injury and death in roadway work zones. Always follow
the posted speed limits when approaching and driving through a work zone. Watch your
speedometer, and don't allow your speed to creep up as you drive through long sections of road
construction. Decrease your speed for adverse weather or road conditions. Decrease your speed
even further when a worker is close to the roadway.

70  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
In Maryland, you must move over when approaching any vehicles while they are stopped, standing,
or parked on a road with its lights flashing. If it is not safe or possible to move over, you must slow
down to a safe speed. Consider the weather, road conditions, traffic, and pedestrians when deciding
a safe speed.

More information on Maryland's "Move Over Laws" can be found at ZeroDeathsMD.gov

Subsections 2.4, 2.5, and 2.6 Test Your Knowledge

    4. How far ahead does the manual say you should look?
    5. What are two main things to look for ahead?
    6. What's your most important way to see the sides and rear of your vehicle?
    7. What does "communicating" mean in safe driving?
    8. Where should you place reflectors when stopped on a divided highway?
    9. What three things add up to total stopping distance?
    10. If you go twice as fast, will your stopping distance increase by two or four times?
    11. Empty trucks have the best braking. True or False?
    12. What is hydroplaning?
    13. What is "black ice"?

These questions may be on the test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsections 2.4, 2.5, and
2.6.

2.7 ­ Managing Space

To be a safe driver, you need space all around your vehicle. When things go wrong, space gives you
time to think and to act.
To have space available when something goes wrong, you need to manage space. While this is true
for all drivers, it is very important for large vehicles. They take up more space, and they require more
space for stopping and turning.

2.7.1 ­ Space Ahead

Of all the space around your vehicle, it is the area ahead of the vehicle ­ the space you're driving into
­ that is most important.

71  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
THE NEED FOR SPACE AHEAD

You need space ahead in case you must suddenly stop. According to crash reports, the vehicle that
trucks and buses often run into is the one in front of them. The most frequent cause is following too
closely. Remember, if the vehicle ahead of you is smaller than yours, it can probably stop faster than
you can. You may crash if you are following too closely.

HOW MUCH SPACE?

How much space should you keep in front of you? One good rule says you need at least one second
for each 10 feet of vehicle length at speeds below 40 mph. At greater speeds, you must add 1 second
for safety.

FOR EXAMPLE:

If you are driving a 40-foot vehicle, you should leave 4 seconds between you and the vehicle ahead.
In a 60-foot rig, you'll need 6 seconds. Over 40 mph, you'd need 5 seconds for a 40-foot vehicle and
7 seconds for a 60-foot vehicle. See Figure 2.12.

To know how much space you have, wait until the vehicle ahead passes a shadow on the road, a
pavement marking, or some other clear landmark. Then count off the seconds like this: "one
thousand- and-one, one thousand-and-two" and so on, until you reach the same spot. Compare your
count with the rule of one second for every ten feet of length.

If you are driving a 40-foot truck and only counted up to 2 seconds, you're too close. Drop back a little
and count again until you have 4 seconds of following distance (or 5 seconds, if you're going over 40
mph). After a little practice, you will know how far back you should be. Remember to add 1 second for
speeds above 40 mph. Also remember that when the road is slippery, you need much more space
to stop.

72  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    Figure 2.12

2.7.2 ­ Space Behind

You can't stop others from following you too closely. But there are things you can do to make it safer.

STAY TO THE RIGHT
Heavy vehicles are often tailgated when they can't keep up with the speed of traffic. This often
happens when you're going uphill. If a heavy load is slowing you down, stay in the right lane if you
can. Going uphill, you should not pass another slow vehicle unless you can get around quickly
and safely.

DEALING WITH TAILGATERS SAFELY
In a large vehicle, it's often hard to see whether a vehicle is close behind you. You may be tailgated:

    · When you are traveling slowly. Drivers trapped behind slow vehicles often follow closely.
    · In bad weather. Many car drivers follow large vehicles closely during bad weather, especially

         when it is hard to see the road ahead.

73               Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
If you find yourself being tailgated, here are some things you can do to reduce the chances of
a crash:

    · Avoid quick changes ­ If you have to slow down or turn, signal early, and reduce speed
         very gradually.

    · Increase your following distance ­ Keeping room in front of you will help you to avoid having
         to make sudden speed or direction changes. It also makes it easier for the tailgater to get
         around you.

    · Don't speed up ­ It's safer to be tailgated at a low speed than a high speed.
    · Avoid tricks ­ Don't turn on your tail lights or flash your brake lights. Follow the

         suggestions above.

2.7.3 ­ Space to the Sides

Commercial vehicles are often wide and take up most of the lane. Safe drivers will manage what little
space they have. You can do this by keeping your vehicle centered in your lane and avoid driving
alongside others.

STAYING CENTERED IN A LANE

You need to keep your vehicle centered in the lane to keep safe clearance on either side. If your
vehicle is wide, you have little room to spare.

TRAVELING NEXT TO OTHERS

There are two dangers in traveling alongside other vehicles:

    · Another driver may change lanes suddenly and turn into you.
    · You may be trapped when you need to change lanes.

Find an open spot where you aren't near other traffic. When traffic is heavy, it may be hard to find an
open spot. If you must travel near other vehicles, try to keep as much space as possible between you
and them. Also, drop back or pull forward so that you are sure the other driver can see you.

STRONG WINDS

Strong winds make it difficult to stay in your lane. The problem is usually worse for lighter vehicles.
This problem can be especially bad when coming out of tunnels. Don't drive alongside other vehicles
if you can avoid it.

2.7.4 ­ Space Overhead

Hitting overhead objects is a danger. Make sure you always have overhead clearance.

74  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
Don't assume that the heights posted at bridges and overpasses are correct. Re-paving or packed
snow may have reduced the clearances since the heights were posted.

The weight of a cargo van changes its height. An empty van is higher than a loaded one. Just
because you were able to fit under a bridge when you were loaded does not mean that you can do it
when you are empty.

If you doubt you have safe space to pass under an object, go slowly. If you aren't sure you can make
it, take another route. Warnings are often posted on low bridges or underpasses, but sometimes they
are not.

Some roads can cause a vehicle to tilt. There can be a problem clearing objects along the edge of the
road, such as signs, trees, or bridge supports. Where this is a problem, drive a little closer to the
center of the road.

Before you back into an area, get out and check for overhanging objects such as trees, branches, or
electric wires. It's easy to miss seeing them while you are backing. (Also check for other hazards at
the same time.)

2.7.5 ­ Space Below

Many drivers forget about the space under their vehicles. That space can be very small when a
vehicle is heavily loaded. This is often a problem on dirt roads and in unpaved yards. Don't take a
chance on getting hung up. Drainage channels across roads can cause the ends of some vehicles to
drag. Cross such depressions carefully.

Railroad tracks can also cause problems, particularly when pulling trailers with a low underneath
clearance. Don't take a chance on getting hung up halfway across.

2.7.6 ­ Space for Turns

The space around a truck or bus is important in turns. Because of wide turning and off-tracking, large
vehicles can hit other vehicles or objects during turns.

RIGHT TURNS

Here are some rules to help prevent right-turn crashes:

    · Turn slowly to give yourself and others more time to avoid problems.
    · If you are driving a truck or bus that cannot make the right turn without swinging into another

         lane, turn wide as you complete the turn. Keep the rear of your vehicle close to the curb. This
         will stop other drivers from passing you on the right.
    · Don't turn wide to the left as you start the turn. A driver behind you may think you are turning
         left and try to pass you on the right. You may crash into the other vehicle as you complete your
         turn.

75  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · If you must cross into the oncoming lane to make a turn, watch out for vehicles coming
        toward you.

    · Give them room to go by or to stop. However, don't back up for them, because you might hit
        someone behind you. See Figure 2.13.

                                                            Figure 2.13

LEFT TURNS
On a left turn, make sure you have reached the center of the intersection before you start the left turn.
If you turn too soon, the left side of your vehicle may hit another vehicle because of off-tracking.
If there are two turning lanes, always take the right turn lane. Don't start in the inside lane because
you may have to swing right to make the turn. Drivers on your left can be more readily seen. See
Figure 2.14.

76  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
                                                            Figure 2.14

2.7.7 ­ Space Needed to Cross or Enter Traffic

Be aware of the size and weight of your vehicle when you cross or enter traffic. Here are some
important things to keep in mind:

    · Because of slow acceleration and the space large vehicles require, you may need a much
         larger gap to enter traffic than you would in a car.

    · Acceleration varies with the load. Allow more room if your vehicle is heavily loaded.
    · Before you start across a road, make sure you can get all the way across before traffic reaches

         you.

77  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.8 ­ Seeing Hazards

2.8.1 ­ The Importance of Seeing Hazards

WHAT IS A HAZARD?

A hazard is any road condition or other road user (driver, bicyclist, pedestrian) that is a possible
danger.

For example, a car in front of you is headed toward the freeway exit, but their brake lights come on
and the car begins braking hard. This could mean the driver is uncertain about taking the off ramp.
The car might suddenly return to the highway. This car is a hazard.

If the driver of the car cuts in front of you, it is no longer just a hazard; it is an emergency.

SEEING HAZARDS LETS YOU BE PREPARED

You will have more time to act if you see hazards before they become emergencies. In the example
above, you might make a lane change or slow down to prevent a crash if the car suddenly cuts in
front of you. Seeing this hazard gives you time to check your mirrors and signal a lane change. Being
prepared reduces the danger. A driver who did not see the hazard until the slow car pulled back on
the highway in front of him would have to do something very suddenly. Sudden braking or a quick
lane change is much more likely to lead to a crash.

LEARNING TO SEE HAZARDS

There are often clues that will help you see hazards. The more you drive, the better you can learn to
see hazards. This section will talk about hazards you should be aware of.

2.8.2 ­ Hazardous Roads

MOVE-OVER LAWS

Law enforcement officers, emergency medical services, fire department personnel and people
working on the road are being hit by vehicles while working at the roadside at a frightening amount.
To lessen the problem, move-over laws have been enacted. These require drivers to slow and
change lanes when approaching a roadside incident or emergency vehicle. You will see posted signs
on roadways in states that have move-over laws.

When nearing an authorized emergency vehicle stopped on the roadside or a work zone, you
should proceed with caution by slowing and yielding the right-of-way. You can do this by making a
lane change into one that is not next to the authorized emergency vehicle or work zone. If it is not

78                    Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
safe to make a lane change, slow down and proceed with caution while maintaining a safe speed
for traffic conditions.

Slow down and be very careful if you see any of the following road hazards:

    · Work Zones ­ When people are working on the road, it is a hazard. There may be narrower
         lanes, sharp turns, or uneven surfaces. Other drivers are often distracted and drive unsafely.
         Workers and construction vehicles may get in the way.

             o Drive slowly and carefully near work zones. Use your four-way flashers or brake lights
                  to warn drivers behind you.

    · Drop Off ­ Sometimes the pavement drops off sharply near the edge of the road. Driving too
         near the edge can tilt your vehicle toward the side of the road. This can cause the top of your
         vehicle to hit roadside objects (signs, tree limbs). Also, it can be hard to steer as you cross the
         drop off, going off the road, or coming back on.

    · Foreign Objects ­ Things that have fallen on the road can be hazards. They can be a danger
         to your tires and wheel rims and cause major damage to your vehicle. Some objects which
         seem harmless can actually be very dangerous. For example, cardboard boxes may be empty,
         but they may also have some solid or heavy material capable of causing damage. The same is
         true of paper and cloth sacks. It is important to remain alert for objects of all sorts, so you can
         see them early enough to avoid them without making sudden and unsafe moves.

    · Off Ramps/On Ramps ­ Freeway and turnpike exits can be very dangerous for commercial
         vehicles. Off ramps and on ramps often have speed limit signs posted. Remember, these
         speeds may be safe for automobiles, but may not be safe for larger vehicles or heavily loaded
         vehicles. Exits that go downhill and turn at the same time are dangerous because the
         downgrade makes it difficult to reduce speed. Braking and turning at the same time can be a
         dangerous practice. Make sure you are going slowly enough before you get on the curved part
         of an off ramp or on ramp.

2.8.3 ­ Drivers Who Are Hazards

To protect yourself and others, you must know when other drivers may do something hazardous.
Some clues to this type of hazard are discussed below.

BLOCKED VISION

People who can't see others are a very dangerous hazard. Be alert for drivers whose vision is
blocked. Vans with the rear window blocked are examples. Rental trucks should be watched carefully.
Their drivers are often not used to the limited vision they have to the sides and rear of the truck. In
winter, vehicles with frosted, ice-covered, or snow-covered windows are hazards.

Vehicles may be partly hidden by blind intersections or alleys. If you only can see the rear or front end
of a vehicle but not the driver, then the driver can't see you. Be alert because they may back out or
enter into your lane. Always be prepared to stop.

79  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
DELIVERY TRUCKS
Packages or vehicle doors often block the driver's vision. Drivers of step vans, postal vehicles, and
local delivery vehicles often are in a hurry and may suddenly step out of their vehicle or drive their
vehicle into the traffic lane.

PARKED VEHICLES
It is not always easy to tell from a distance when someone might be about to get out of a parked
vehicle. The parked vehicle may suddenly start up and drive into your way. Watch for movement
inside the vehicle or movement of the vehicle itself that shows people are inside. Watch for brake
lights or backup lights, exhaust, and other clues that a driver is about to move.

STOPPED BUS
Passengers may cross in front of or behind the bus, and they often can't see you.

PEDESTRIANS AND BICYCLISTS
Walkers, joggers, and bicyclists may be on the road with their back to the traffic, so they can't see
you. Sometimes they wear headphones, so they can't hear you either. This can be dangerous. On
rainy days, pedestrians may not see you because of hats or umbrellas. They may be hurrying to get
out of the rain and may not pay attention to the traffic.

DISTRACTIONS
People who are distracted are hazards. Watch for where they are looking. If they are looking
elsewhere, they can't see you. But be alert even when they are looking at you. They may believe that
they have the right of way.

CHILDREN
Children tend to act quickly without checking traffic. Children playing with one another may not look
for traffic and are a serious hazard.

TALKERS
Drivers or pedestrians talking to one another may not be paying close attention to the traffic.

WORKERS
People working on or near the roadway are a hazard. The work creates a distraction for other drivers
and the workers themselves may not see you.

80  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
ICE CREAM TRUCKS

Someone selling ice cream is a hazard. Children may be nearby and may not see you.

DISABLED VEHICLES

Drivers changing a tire or fixing an engine often do not pay attention to the danger that roadway traffic
is to them. They are often careless. Jacked up wheels or raised hoods are hazards.

CRASHES

People involved in a crash may not look for traffic. Passing drivers tend to look at the crash. People
often run across the road without looking. Vehicles may slow or stop suddenly.

SHOPPERS

People in and around shopping areas are often not watching traffic because they are looking for
stores or looking into store windows.

CONFUSED DRIVERS

Confused drivers often change direction suddenly or stop without warning. Confusion is common near
freeway or turnpike interchanges and major intersections. Tourists unfamiliar with the area can be
very hazardous. Signs of tourists include car-top luggage and out-of- state license plates. Unexpected
actions like stopping in the middle of a block, changing lanes for no apparent reason, backup lights
suddenly turning on, are signs of confusion. You may notice hesitation, including driving very slowly,
using brakes often, or stopping in the middle of an intersection. You may also see drivers who are
looking at street signs, maps, and house numbers. These drivers may not be paying attention to you.

SLOW DRIVERS.

Drivers who do not maintain normal speed are hazards. Seeing slow moving vehicles early can
prevent a crash. Some vehicles are naturally slow and a hazard. These are vehicles like mopeds,
farm machinery, construction machinery, and tractors. Some of these will have the "slow moving
vehicle" symbol to warn you. This is a red triangle with an orange center. Watch for it.

DRIVERS SIGNALING A TURN

Drivers signaling a turn may slow more than expected or even stop. If they are making a tight turn into
an alley or driveway, they may go very slowly. If pedestrians or other vehicles block them, they may
have to stop on the roadway. Vehicles turning left may have to stop for oncoming vehicles.

81  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
DRIVERS IN A HURRY

Other drivers may feel your vehicle is keeping them from getting where they want to go on time.
These drivers may pass you without a safe gap in the oncoming traffic, cutting too close in front of
you. Drivers entering the road may pull in front of you in order to avoid being stuck behind you,
causing you to brake. Be aware of this and watch for drivers who are in a hurry.

IMPAIRED DRIVERS OR DISTRACTED

Drivers who are sleepy, have had too much to drink, are on drugs, distracted, or who are ill are
hazards. Some warnings to these drivers are:

    · Swerving across the road or drifting from one side to another.
    · Leaving the road (dropping right wheels onto the shoulder, or bumping across a curb in a turn).
    · Stopping at the wrong time (stopping at a green light, or waiting for too long at a stop).
    · Driving with an open window in cold weather.
    · Speeding up or slowing down suddenly, driving too fast or too slow.

Be alert for drunk drivers and sleepy drivers late at night.

DRIVER BODY MOVEMENT AS A WARNING

Drivers look in the direction they are going to turn. You may sometimes get a clue from a driver's
head and body movements that a driver may be going to make a turn, even though the turn signals
aren't on. Drivers making over-the-shoulder checks may be going to change lanes. These clues are
most easily seen in motorcyclists and bicyclists. Watch other road users and try to tell whether they
might do something hazardous.

CONFLICTS

You are in conflict when you have to change speed or direction to avoid hitting someone. Conflicts
can happen:

    · at intersections where vehicles meet,
    · at merges such as highway on ramps
    · and where there are needed lane changes such as the end of a lane, forcing a move to

         another lane of traffic.

Other situations include slow moving or stalled traffic in a traffic lane, and crash scenes. Watch for
other drivers who are in conflict because they are a hazard to you. When they react to this conflict,
they may do something that will put them in conflict with you.

82  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.8.4 ­ Always Have a Plan

You should always be looking for hazards. Continue to learn to see hazards on the road. Don't forget
why you are looking for hazards. It is because they may turn into emergencies.

You look for the hazards to have time to plan a way out of any emergency. When you see a hazard,
think about the emergencies that could develop and figure out what you would do.

Always be prepared to act based on your plans. In this way, you will be a prepared, defensive driver
who will improve your own safety as well as the safety of all road users.

Subsections 2.7 and 2.8 Test Your Knowledge

    1. How do you find out how many seconds of following distance space you have?
    2. If you are driving a 30-foot vehicle at 55 mph, how many seconds of following distance should

         you allow?
    3. You should decrease your following distance if somebody is following you too closely.

         True or False?
    4. If you swing wide to the left before turning right, another driver may try to pass you on the right.

         True or False?
    5. What is a hazard?
    6. Why make emergency plans when you see a hazard?

These questions may be on the test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsections 2.7 and 2.8

2.9 ­ Distracted Driving

A driver distraction is anything that takes your attention away from driving. Whenever you are driving
a vehicle and your full attention is not on the driving task, you are putting yourself, your passengers,
other vehicles, and pedestrians in danger. Distracted driving can cause collisions, resulting in injury,
death or property damage.

Activities inside of the vehicle that can distract your attention include:

    · Talking to passengers,
    · Adjusting the radio or climate controls,
    · Eating, drinking or smoking,
    · Reading,

83  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Picking up something that fell,
    · Talking on a cell phone or vehicle radio,
    · Reading or sending text messages,
    · Using any type of electronic devices (such as navigation systems, computers, etc.),
    · Daydreaming or being occupied with other mental distractions,
    · and many others.

Possible distractions that could happen outside a moving vehicle:

    · Outside traffic, vehicles or pedestrians,
    · Outside events such as police pulling someone over or a crash scene,
    · Sunlight/sunset,
    · Objects in roadway,
    · Road construction,
    · Reading billboards or other road advertisements,
    · and many others.

2.9.1 ­ The Distracted Driving Crash Problem

Studies have shown that 8% of large-truck crashes happened when Commercial Motor Vehicle
(CMV) drivers were externally distracted and 2% of large truck crashes happened when the driver
was internally distracted.

Almost 5,500 people are killed each year on U.S. roadways, and an estimated 448,000 people are
injured in motor vehicle crashes involving distracted driving (NHTSA Traffic Safety Facts: Distracted
Driving).

Research shows that talking on a cell phone, even if it's hands-free, drains the brain of 39% of the
energy it would normally use for safe driving. Drivers who use a hand-held device are more likely to
get into a crash serious enough to cause injury. (NHTSA distracted driving website,
www.distraction.gov).

2.9.2 ­ Effects of Distracted Driving

Effects of distracted driving include:

    · Slowed Perception ­ which may cause you to be delayed in perceiving or completely fail to
         perceive an important traffic event.

    · Delayed Decision Making ­ which can cause you to be delayed in taking the proper action.
    · Improper Action ­ which can cause you to make mistakes in steering, accelerating,

         or braking.

84  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.9.3 ­ Types of Distractions

There are many causes of distraction which can all increase risk of accident and injury.

    · Physical distraction ­ one that causes you to take your hands off the wheel or eyes off the
         road, such as reaching for an object.

    · Mental distraction ­ activities that take your mind away from the road, such as talking to a
         passenger or thinking about something that happened during the day.

    · Both physical and mental distraction ­ even greater chance a crash could happen, such as
         talking on a cell phone; or sending or reading text messages.

2.9.4 ­ Cell/Mobile Phones

FROM DRIVER HANDBOOK: CELL PHONES

It is illegal to use a hand-held cell phone, including texting, while driving. This means you cannot use
your phone while holding it. You can use your phone for calls while driving if you are not holding it
(hands-free). If you do this, you should use it as little as possible and do the following to stay safe:

    · Use your cell phone only in emergencies; if possible, have a passenger make the call.
    · If you must make a call, pull safely off the road, and stop before making the call.
    · Let your voicemail answer incoming calls.
    · Keep your telephone conversations short.

If you are under 18 years old, you may not use a cell phone while driving, even hands-free. The only
exception is that you may use it to make a 911 call. Federal law limits how drivers of commercial
motor vehicles (CMVs) can use mobile phones while driving. These rules are in Title 49 CFR Parts
383, 384, 390, 391, and 392 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSRs), and in the
Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR).

WHAT THE RULES SAY
    · You cannot use a hand-held mobile phone while driving a CMV.
    · You cannot dial by pressing more than one button.
    · You cannot reach for a phone in a way that makes you move out of your seatbelt or
         seated position.
    · Motor carriers cannot let or require their drivers to use hand-held phones while driving.
    · If you choose to use a phone while driving a CMV, you may only use a hands-free device that:
             o Can be operated by pressing a single button, and
             o Is mounted within easy reach while you are seated and wearing a seat belt.

85  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
PENALTIES
If you're convicted of using a hand-held phone while driving a CMV:

    · You may lose your Commercial Driver's License (CDL):
             o 60-day disqualification for a second offense within 3 years
             o 120-day disqualification for a third or later offense within 3 years

    · You may be fined up to $2,750.
    · Your employer may be fined up to $11,000 if they allow or require you to use a hand-held

         phone while driving.

EMERGENCY EXCEPTION
You may use a hand-held phone only in an emergency, such as to contact police, firefighters, or other
emergency services.

SAFETY RISKS
Research shows that CMV drivers are 6 times more likely to be in a crash, near-crash, or drift out of
their lane when dialing a phone. Drivers take their eyes off the road for an average of 3.8 seconds
while dialing. At 55 mph, that's like driving the length of a football field without looking at the road.

STAY FOCUSED
Your first responsibility as a CMV driver is to drive safely. Stay alert and keep your eyes and mind on
the road.
Even hands-free phones can be distracting. Talking on any phone takes your attention away
from driving.

2.9.5 ­ Texting

Federal law bans texting while driving a CMV in interstate commerce. These rules are part of Title 49
CFR Parts 383, 384, 390, 391, and 392 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSRs).

WHAT THE RULES SAY
    · CMV drivers are not allowed to text while driving.
    · Motor carriers are not allowed to let or require drivers to text while driving.
    · Texting includes typing or reading messages on a phone, tablet, or other electronic device.
    · You may only text in an emergency, such as to contact police, firefighters, or emergency
         medical services.

86  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
PENALTIES

If you're convicted of texting while driving a CMV:

    · You can lose your Commercial Driver's License (CDL):
             o 60-day disqualification for a second offense within 3 years
             o 120-day disqualification for three or more offenses within 3 years

    · You can be fined up to $2,750.
    · Your employer can be fined up to $11,000 for allowing or requiring you to text while driving.

WHY TEXTING IS DANGEROUS

Texting is one of the most dangerous distractions because it:

    · Takes your eyes off the road
    · Takes your hands off the wheel
    · Takes your mind off driving

In fact, research shows:

    · You are 23 times more likely to be in a crash or near-crash if you text while driving a CMV.
    · On average, texting takes your eyes off the road for 4.6 seconds.
    · At 55 mph, that's like driving 371 feet -- a full football field -- without looking.

Stay safe. Never text while driving. Your first job as a CMV driver is to keep your focus on the road
and drive safely.

2.9.6 ­ Don't Drive Distracted

From Driver Handbook: Distracted Driving

Concentration is very important and necessary for safe driving. You should be constantly aware of the
road and the other vehicles around you. Keep alert and you may be able to avoid a crash. Constantly
check where other vehicles are in front, behind, and next to you.

"Distracted driving" is when you take your eyes, hands or especially your mind, away from driving.
Distracted driving causes more crashes that are reported to the police than anything else. Any
distraction can cause you to miss seeing and hearing things that could help you avoid a crash. Many
activities contribute to distracted driving. Some examples include:

    · Eating and drinking.
    · Adjusting the radio or other sources of music.
    · Adjusting or programming a GPS.

87  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Dealing with children and pets.
    · Loose objects moving in the vehicle.
    · Talking and texting on a cell phone.
    · Smoking.
    · Putting on makeup.
    · Shaving.
    · Reading.
    · Interacting with others in the vehicle.

2.9.7 ­ Watch Out for Distracted Drivers

You need to be able to recognize other drivers who are engaged in any form of driving distraction.
Not recognizing other distracted drivers can prevent you from perceiving or reacting correctly in time
to prevent a crash. Watch for:

    · Vehicles drifting over the lane divider lines or within their own lane.
    · Vehicles traveling at inconsistent speeds.
    · Drivers who are preoccupied with maps, food, smoking, cell phones, or other objects.
    · Drivers who appear to be involved in conversations with their passengers.

Give a distracted driver plenty of room and maintain your safe following distance.

Be very careful when passing a driver who seems to be distracted. The other driver may not be aware
of your presence, and they may drift in front of you.

2.10 ­ Aggressive Drivers/Road Rage          Section 2: Knowledge Test Background

2.10.1 ­ What Is It?

Examples of aggressive driving include:
    · Speeding,
    · Tailgating,
    · Ignoring traffic signals and devices,
    · Making unsafe lane changes,
    · Not yielding the right-of-way, and

88
    · Unsafe or illegal passing.

Crowded roads, unexpected delays, rushing, road construction, and stress can cause people to drive
aggressively. You must respect and cooperate with all other people using the road. You must follow
all rules to keep everyone safe and avoid crashes. Some tips to reduce the possibility of becoming
involved in an aggressive driving incident are:

    · Allow extra time to travel.
    · Be patient.
    · Be courteous.
    · Focus on your driving behavior.
    · Always signal your intentions. (Let other drivers know what you plan to do by using turn

         signals, etc.)
    · Obey all traffic laws, signs, signals, and pavement markings.
    · Yield the right-of-way.
    · Avoid competing with other drivers.

2.10.2 ­ Don't Be an Aggressive Driver

How you feel before you even start your vehicle has a lot to do with how stress will affect you while
driving. Here are some tips to keep calm and prevent aggression while driving:

    · Reduce your stress before and while you drive.
    · Give the drive your full attention. Don't allow yourself to become distracted by talking on your

         cell phone, eating, etc.
    · Be realistic about your travel time. Expect delays because of traffic, construction, or bad

         weather and make allowances.
    · If you're going to be later than you expected, deal with it. Take a deep breath and accept the

         delay.
    · Give other drivers the benefit of the doubt. Try to imagine why they are driving that way.

         Whatever their reason, it has nothing to do with you.
    · Slow down and keep your following distance reasonable.
    · Don't drive slowly in the left lane of traffic.
    · Avoid gestures. Keep your hands on the wheel. Avoid making any gestures that might anger

         another driver, even seemingly harmless expressions of irritation like shaking your head.
    · Be a cautious and courteous driver. If another driver seems eager to get in front of you, say,

         "Be my guest." This response will soon become a habit, and you won't be as offended by other
         drivers' actions.

89  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.10.3 ­ What You Should Do When Confronted by an Aggressive Driver

    · First and foremost, make every attempt to get out of their way.
    · Do not challenge them by speeding up or attempting to hold-your-own in your travel lane.
    · Avoid eye contact.
    · Ignore gestures and refuse to react to them.
    · Report aggressive drivers to the appropriate authorities by providing a vehicle description,

         license number, location and, if possible, direction of travel.
    · If you have a cell phone, and can do it safely, call the police.
    · If an aggressive driver is involved in a crash farther down the road, stop a safe distance from

         the crash scene, wait for the police to arrive, and report the driving behavior that you
         witnessed.

Subsections 2.9 and 2.10 Test Your Knowledge

    1. What are some tips to follow so you won't become a distracted driver?
    2. How do you use in-vehicle communications equipment cautiously?
    3. How do you recognize a distracted driver?
    4. What should you do when confronted with an aggressive driver?
    5. What are some things you can do to reduce your stress before and while you drive?
These questions may be on the test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsections 2.9 and 2.10.

2.11 ­ Driving at Night

2.11.1 ­ It is More Dangerous

You are at greater risk when you drive at night. Drivers cannot see hazards or risks as quickly as in
daylight; so, they have less time to respond and are less able to avoid a crash.
The problems of night driving involve the driver, the roadway, and the vehicle.

90  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.11.2 ­ Driver Factors

Vision: Good vision is critical for safe driving. Your control of the brake, accelerator, and steering
wheel is based on what you see. If you cannot see clearly, you will have trouble identifying traffic and
roadway conditions, spotting potential trouble or quickly responding to problems.

Because seeing well is so important to safe driving, you should have your eyes checked regularly by
an eye specialist. You may never know you have poor vision unless your eyes are tested. If you need
to wear glasses or contact lenses for driving, remember to:

    · Always wear them when driving, even for short distances. If your driver license says corrective
         lenses are required, it is illegal to move a vehicle without using corrective lenses.

    · Keep an extra set of corrective lenses in your vehicle. If your normal corrective lenses are
         broken or lost, you can use the spare lenses to drive safely.

    · Avoid using dark or tinted corrective lenses at night, even if you think they help with glare.
         Tinted lenses reduce the light that you need to see clearly under night driving conditions.

Glare: Drivers can be blinded for a short time by bright light. It can take several seconds to recover
from glare. Even two seconds of glare blindness can be dangerous. A vehicle going 55 mph will travel
more than half the distance of a football field during that time.

Fatigue and Lack of Alertness: Fatigue is physical or mental tiredness that can be caused by
physical or mental strain, repetitive tasks, illness or lack of sleep. Just like alcohol and drugs, it
impairs your vision and judgment.

Fatigue causes errors related to speed and distance, increases your risk of being in a crash, causes
you to not see and react to hazards as quickly; and impacts your ability to make critical decisions.
When you are fatigued, you could fall asleep behind the wheel and crash, injuring or killing yourself or
others.

National Sleep Foundation's 2022 Report: Drowsy driving is a significant public health concern in the
United States. Rigorous estimates suggest drowsy driving related motor vehicle crashes account for
roughly 20% of all motor vehicle crashes. In fact, data from the AAA Foundation indicates that
sleepiness is implicated in 21% of all motor vehicle crashes resulting in a death and 13% of motor
vehicle crashes resulting in hospitalizations--totaling over 300,000 police-reported crashes, over
100,000 injuries, and over 6,000 deaths in the United States each year. The National Sleep
Foundation believes these figures are likely underestimates of the true scope of the problem.

AT-RISK GROUPS

Crashes tend to happen at times when people are most likely to be tired for example, during the night
and in the mid-afternoon. Most people are less alert at night, especially after midnight. This is even
more likely if you have been driving for a long time. People who drive at night are much more likely to
have fall-asleep crashes.

Research has shown young males, shift workers, commercial drivers, long-haul drivers, people with
untreated sleep disorders, and people with short- term or chronic sleep deprivation are at higher risk
for having a fall-asleep crash.

91  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
At least 15% of all heavy truck crashes involve fatigue. A congressionally mandated study of 80 long-
haul truck drivers in the United States and Canada found that drivers averaged less than 5 hours of
sleep per day. (Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 1996) It is no surprise then that the
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) reported that drowsy driving was probably the cause of
more than half of crashes leading to a truck driver's death. (NTSB, 1990) For each truck driver
fatality, another three to four people are killed. (NHTSA, 1994)

WARNING SIGNS OF FATIGUE

According to the National Sleep Foundation's Sleep in America poll, 60% of Americans have driven
while feeling sleepy and 36% admit to having fallen asleep at the wheel in the past year. However,
many people cannot tell if or when they are about to fall asleep. Here are some signs that should tell
you to stop and rest:

    · Difficulty focusing, frequent blinking or heavy eyelids
    · Yawning repeatedly or rubbing eyes
    · Daydreaming; or wandering/disconnected thoughts
    · Trouble remembering the last few miles driven; missing exits or traffic signs
    · Trouble keeping your head up
    · Drifting from your lane, following too closely or hitting a shoulder rumble strip
    · Feeling restless and irritable

When you are tired trying to "push on" is far more dangerous than most drivers think. It is a major
cause of fatal crashes. If you notice any signs of fatigue, stop driving and go to sleep for the night or
take a 15­20 minute nap.

ARE YOU AT RISK?

Before you drive, consider whether you are:

    · Sleep-deprived or fatigued
             o 6 hours of sleep or less triples your risk

    · Experiencing sleep loss (insomnia), poor quality sleep, or not getting enough sleep each night
    · Driving long distances without proper rest breaks
    · Driving through the night, mid-afternoon or when you would normally be asleep.

             o Many heavy motor vehicle crashes occur between midnight and 6 a.m.
    · Taking medications that make you sleepy

             o Antidepressants, cold tablets, antihistamines ­ check the warnings on the
                  medicine labels

    · Working more than 60 hours a week
             o Increases your risk by 40%

92  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Working more than one job, and your main job involves shift work
    · Driving alone or on a long, rural, dark or boring road
    · Flying or changing time zones

PREVENTING DROWSINESS BEFORE A TRIP:
    · Get enough sleep. Adults need 8 to 9 hours to maintain alertness.
    · Prepare your route carefully to identify total distance, stopping points, and other
         logistic considerations.
    · Schedule trips for the hours you are normally awake, not the middle of the night.
    · Drive with a passenger.
    · Avoid medications that cause drowsiness.
    · Consult your primary care provider if you suffer from daytime sleepiness, have difficulty
         sleeping at night or take frequent naps.
    · Incorporate exercise into your daily life to give you more energy.

MAINTAINING ALERTNESS WHILE DRIVING:
    · Protect yourself from glare and eye strain with sunglasses.
    · Keep cool by opening the window or using the air conditioner.
    · Avoid heavy foods higher in calories. They take longer to digest which makes you tired.
    · Be aware of down time during the day ­ down time is when you are not actively driving.
    · Have another CDL holder ride with you, and take turns driving.
    · Take periodic breaks ­ about every 100 miles or 2 hours during long trips.
    · Stop driving and get some rest or take a nap.
    · Caffeine can increase awareness for a few hours, but do not drink too much. It will eventually
         wear off. Do not rely on caffeine to prevent fatigue.
    · Avoid drugs. While they may keep you awake for a while, they won't make you alert.
    · If you are drowsy, the only safe cure is to get off the road and get some sleep. If you don't, you
         risk your life and the lives of others.

2.11.3 ­ Roadway Factors

POOR LIGHTING

In the daytime there is usually enough light to see well. This is not true at night. Some areas may
have bright street lights, but many areas will have poor lighting. On most roads you will probably have
to depend entirely on your headlights.

93  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
Less light means you will not be able to see hazards as well as in daytime. Others on the road who
do not have lights are hard to see. There are many crashes at night involving pedestrians, joggers,
bicyclists, and animals.

Even when there are lights, the road scene can be confusing. Traffic signals and hazards can be hard
to see against a background of signs, shop windows, and other lights.

Drive slower when lighting is poor or confusing and make sure you can stop in the distance you can
see ahead.

DRUNK DRIVERS

Drunk drivers and drivers under the influence of drugs are a hazard to themselves and to you. Be
especially alert around the closing times for bars and taverns. Watch for drivers who have trouble
staying in their lane or maintaining speed, who stop without reason, or show other signs of being
under the influence of alcohol or drugs.

2.11.4 ­ Vehicle Factors

HEADLIGHTS

At night your headlights will usually be the main source of light for you to see by and for others to see
you. You can't see nearly as much with your headlights as you see in the daytime. With low beams
you can see ahead about 250 feet and with high beams about 350-500 feet. You must adjust your
speed to keep your stopping distance within your sight distance. This means going slowly enough to
be able to stop within the range of your headlights. Otherwise, by the time you see a hazard, you will
not have time to stop.

Night driving can be more dangerous if you have problems with your headlights. Dirty headlights may
give only half the light they should. This cuts down your ability to see and makes it harder for others
to see you. Make sure your lights are clean and working. Headlights can be out of adjustment. If they
don't point in the right direction, they won't give you a good view and they can blind other drivers.
Have a qualified person make sure they are adjusted properly. One example of a qualified person
might be a vehicle repair technician.

OTHER LIGHTS

For you to be seen easily, the following must be clean and working properly:

    · Reflectors.
    · Marker lights.
    · Clearance lights.
    · Taillights.
    · Identification lights.

94  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
TURN SIGNALS AND BRAKE LIGHTS

At night your turn signals and brake lights are even more important for telling other drivers what you
intend to do. Make sure you have clean, working turn signals and stop lights.

WINDSHIELD AND MIRRORS

It is more important at night than in the daytime to have a clean windshield and clean mirrors. Bright
lights at night can cause dirt on your windshield or mirrors to create a glare of its own, blocking your
view. Most people have experienced driving toward the sun just as it has risen or is about to set, and
found that they can barely see through a windshield that seemed to look okay in the middle of the
day. Clean your windshield on the inside and outside for safe driving at night.

2.11.5 ­ Night Driving Procedures

VEHICLE PROCEDURES

Make sure you are rested and alert. If you are drowsy, sleep before you drive! Even a nap can save
your life or the lives of others. If you wear eyeglasses, make sure they are clean and unscratched.
Don't wear sunglasses at night. Do a complete vehicle inspection. Check all lights and reflectors,
cleaning all those you can reach.

AVOID BLINDING OTHERS

Be aware that glare from your headlights can cause problems for drivers coming toward you. They
can also bother drivers going in the same direction you are, when your lights shine in their rearview
mirrors.

AVOID GLARE FROM ONCOMING VEHICLES

Do not look directly at lights of oncoming vehicles. Look slightly to the right at a right lane or edge
marking, if available. If other drivers do not put their low beams on, do not respond by putting your
own high beams on. This increases glare for oncoming drivers and increases the chance of a crash.

USE HIGH BEAMS WHEN YOU CAN

Some drivers make the mistake of always using low beams. This seriously cuts down on their ability
to see ahead. Use high beams when it is safe and legal to do so. Use them when you are not within
500 feet of an approaching vehicle. Also, don't let the inside of your cab get too bright. This makes it
harder to see outside. Keep the interior light off and adjust your instrument lights as low as you can to
still be able to read the gauges.

95  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
IF YOU GET SLEEPY, STOP AT THE NEAREST SAFE PLACE

People often don't realize how close they are to falling asleep even when their eyelids are falling shut.
If you can safely do so, look at yourself in a mirror. If you look sleepy, or you just feel sleepy, stop
driving! You are in a very dangerous condition. The only safe cure is to stop at the nearest safe place
and sleep.

2.12 ­ Driving in Fog

Fog can happen at any time. Fog on highways can be extremely dangerous. Fog is often unexpected,
and you can lose visibility rapidly. You should watch for foggy conditions and be ready to reduce your
speed. Do not assume that the fog will thin out after you enter it.

The best advice is not to drive in fog. It is better that you pull off the road into a rest area or truck stop
until you can see better and the fog is gone. If you must drive, be sure to consider the following:

    · Obey all fog-related warning signs.
    · Slow down before you enter fog.
    · Use low-beam headlights and fog lights for best visibility even in daytime and be alert for other

         drivers who may have forgotten to turn on their lights.
    · Turn on your 4-way flashers. This will give vehicles approaching you from behind a quicker

         opportunity to notice your vehicle.
    · Watch for vehicles on the side of the roadway. Seeing taillights or headlights in front of you

         may not correctly show where the road is ahead of you. The vehicle may not be on the road at
         all.
    · Use roadside highway reflectors as guides to determine how the road may curve ahead of you.
    · Listen for traffic you cannot see.
    · Avoid passing other vehicles.
    · Don't stop along the side of the road, unless absolutely necessary.

2.13 ­ Driving in Winter

2.13.1 ­ Vehicle Checks

Make sure your vehicle is ready before driving in winter weather. You should make a regular vehicle
inspection, paying extra attention to the following items.

96                        Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
COOLANT LEVEL AND ANTIFREEZE AMOUNT

Make sure the cooling system is full and there is enough antifreeze in the system to protect against
freezing. You can check this with a special coolant tester.

DEFROSTING AND HEATING EQUIPMENT

Make sure the defrosters work. They are needed for safe driving. Make sure the heater is working,
and that you know how to operate it. If you use other heaters like mirror heaters, battery box heaters
or fuel tank heaters, check their operation as well.

WIPERS AND WASHERS

Make sure the windshield wiper blades are in good condition. Make sure the wiper blades press
against the window hard enough to wipe the windshield clean, otherwise they may not sweep off
snow properly. Make sure the windshield washer works and there is washing fluid in the
washer reservoir.

Use windshield washer appropriate for the temperature. If you cannot see well enough while driving
(for example, if your wipers fail), stop safely and fix the problem.

TIRES

Make sure you have enough tread on your tires. The drive tires must provide traction to push the
vehicle over wet pavement and through snow. The steering tires must have traction to steer the
vehicle. Enough tread is especially important in winter conditions. You must have at least 4/32-inch
tread depth in every major groove on front tires and at least 2/32 inch on other tires. More would be
better. Use a gauge to determine if you have enough tread for safe driving.

97  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
                                                           Figure 2.14A

TIRE CHAINS
You may find yourself in conditions where you can't drive without chains, even to get to a place of
safety. Carry the right number of chains and extra cross-links. Make sure they will fit your drive tires.
Check the chains for broken hooks, worn or broken cross-links, and bent or broken side chains. Learn
how to put the chains on before you need to do it in snow and ice.

LIGHTS AND REFLECTORS
Make sure the lights and reflectors are clean. Lights and reflectors are especially important during
bad weather. Check from time to time during bad weather to make sure they are clean and working
properly.

WINDOWS AND MIRRORS
Remove any ice, snow, etc., from the windshield, windows, and mirrors before starting. Use a
windshield scraper, snow brush, and windshield defroster as necessary.

HAND HOLDS, STEPS, AND DECK PLATES
Remove all ice and snow from hand holds, steps, and deck plates. This will reduce the danger
of slipping.

98  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
RADIATOR SHUTTERS AND WINTERFRONT
Remove ice from the radiator shutters. Make sure the winterfront is not closed too tightly. If the
shutters freeze shut or the winterfront is closed too tight, the engine may overheat and stop.

EXHAUST SYSTEM
Exhaust system leaks are especially dangerous when cab ventilation may be poor (windows rolled
up, etc.). Loose connections could permit poisonous carbon monoxide to leak into your vehicle.
Carbon monoxide gas will cause you to be sleepy. In large enough amounts it can kill you. Check the
exhaust system for loose parts and for sounds and signs of leaks.

2.13.2 ­ Driving

START GENTLY AND SLOWLY
When first starting, get the feel of the road. Don't hurry.

CHECK FOR ICE
Check for ice on the road, especially bridges and overpasses. A lack of spray from other vehicles
indicates ice has formed on the road. Also, check your mirrors and wiper blades for ice. If they have
ice, the road most likely will be icy as well.

SLIPPERY SURFACES
Drive slowly and smoothly on slippery roads. If it is very slippery, you shouldn't drive at all. Stop at the
first safe place.

ADJUST TURNING AND BRAKING IN POOR WEATHER CONDITIONS
Make turns as gently as possible. Don't brake any harder than needed. Don't use the engine brake or
speed retarder as they can cause the driving wheels to skid on slippery surfaces.

ADJUST SPEED IN POOR WEATHER CONDITIONS
Don't pass slower vehicles unless necessary. Go slowly and watch far enough ahead to keep a
steady speed. Avoid having to slow down and speed up. Take curves at slower speeds and don't
brake while in curves. Be aware that as the temperature rises to the point where ice begins to melt,
the road becomes even more slippery. Slow down more.

99  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
ADJUST SPACE IN POOR WEATHER CONDITIONS

Don't drive alongside other vehicles. Keep a longer following distance. When you see a traffic jam
ahead, slow down or stop to wait for it to clear. Try hard to anticipate stops early and slow down
gradually. Watch for snowplows, as well as salt and sand trucks, and give them plenty of room.

WET BRAKES

When driving in heavy rain or deep standing water, your brakes will get wet. Water in the brakes can
cause the brakes to be weak, to apply unevenly, or to grab. This can cause lack of braking power,
wheel lockups, pulling to one side or the other, and jackknife if you pull a trailer.

Avoid driving through deep puddles or flowing water if possible. If you can't avoid them, you should:

    · Slow down and place transmission in a low gear.
    · Gently put on the brakes. This presses linings against brake drums or discs and keeps mud,

         silt, sand, and water from getting in.
    · Increase engine rpm and cross the water while keeping light pressure on the brakes.
    · When out of the water, maintain light pressure on the brakes for a short distance to heat them

         up and dry them out.
    · Make a test stop when safe to do so. Check behind to make sure no one is following, then

         apply the brakes to be sure they work well. If not, dry them out further as described above.

   CAUTION: Do not apply too much brake pressure and accelerator at the same time, or you
   can overheat brake drums and linings.

2.14 ­ Driving in Very Hot Weather

2.14.1 ­ Vehicle Checks

Do a normal vehicle inspection, but pay special attention to the following items:

TIRES
Check the tire mounting and air pressure. Inspect the tires every two hours or every 100 miles when
driving in very hot weather. Air pressure increases with temperature. Do not let air out or the pressure
will be too low when the tires cool off. If a tire is too hot to touch, remain stopped until the tire cools
off. Otherwise the tire may blow out or catch fire.

100  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
ENGINE OIL

The engine oil helps keep the engine cool, as well as lubricated. Make sure there is enough engine
oil. If you have an oil temperature gauge, make sure the temperature is within the proper range while
you are driving.

ENGINE COOLANT

Before starting out, make sure the engine cooling system has enough water and antifreeze according
to the engine manufacturer's directions. Antifreeze helps the engine under hot conditions as well as
cold conditions.

When driving, check the water temperature or coolant temperature gauge from time to time. Make
sure that it remains in the normal range. If the gauge goes above the highest safe temperature, there
may be something wrong that could lead to engine failure and possibly fire. Stop driving as soon as
safely possible and try to find out what is wrong.

Some vehicles have sight glasses, see-through coolant overflow containers, or coolant recovery
containers. These permit you to check the coolant level while the engine is hot. If the container is not
part of the pressurized system, the cap can be safely removed and coolant added even when the
engine is at operating temperature.

Never remove the radiator cap or any part of the pressurized system until the system has cooled.
Steam and boiling water can spray under pressure and cause severe burns. If you can touch the
radiator cap with your bare hand, it is probably cool enough to open.

If coolant must be added to a system without a recovery tank or overflow tank, follow these steps:

    · Shut engine off.
    · Wait until the engine has cooled.
    · Protect your hands (use gloves or a thick cloth).
    · Turn the radiator cap slowly to the first stop, which releases the pressure seal.
    · Step back while pressure is released from the cooling system.
    · When all pressure has been released, press down on the cap and turn it further to remove it.
    · Visually check the level of coolant and add more coolant if necessary.
    · Replace cap and turn all the way to the closed position.

ENGINE BELTS

Learn how to check v-belt tightness on your vehicle by pressing on the belts. Loose belts will not turn
the water pump or fan properly. This will result in overheating. Also, check belts for cracking or other
signs of wear.

101  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
HOSES
Make sure coolant hoses are in good condition. A broken hose while driving can lead to engine failure
and even fire.

2.14.2 ­ Driving

WATCH FOR BLEEDING TAR
Tar in the road pavement frequently rises to the surface in very hot weather. Spots where tar "bleeds"
to the surface are very slippery.

GO SLOWLY ENOUGH TO PREVENT OVERHEATING
High speeds create more heat for tires and the engine. In desert conditions the heat may build up
to the point where it is dangerous. The heat will increase chances of tire failure or even fire, and
engine failure.

Subsections 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, and 2.14 Test Your Knowledge

    1. You should use low beams whenever you can. True or False?
    2. What should you do before you drive if you are drowsy?
    3. What effects can wet brakes cause? How can you avoid these problems?
    4. You should let air out of hot tires so the pressure goes back to normal. True or False?
    5. You can safely remove the radiator cap if the engine isn't overheated. True or False?
These questions may be on the test. If you can't answer all of them, re-read subsections 2.11, 2.12,
2.13, and 2.14.

2.15 ­ Railroad-highway Crossings

Railroad-highway crossings are a special kind of intersection where the roadway crosses train tracks.
These crossings are always dangerous. You must approach every railroad-highway crossing as if a
train is coming. It is extremely difficult to judge the distance of the train from the crossing as well as
the speed of an approaching train.

102  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.15.1 ­ Types of Crossings

There are 2 types of railroad crossings you may come across:

    · Passive Crossings ­ This type of crossing does not have any type of traffic control device.
         The decision to stop or continue driving is entirely up to you. Passive crossings require you to
         recognize the crossing, search for any train using the tracks and decide if there is enough clear
         space to cross safely. If you see a train and aren't sure how far away it is, you should not cross
         until it is safe to do so.

    · Active Crossings ­ This type of crossing has traffic control devices to alert drivers when it is
         not safe to cross the tracks. These devices could include flashing red lights. They may have
         gates, signals, and bells, but not always.

2.15.2 ­ Warning Signs and Devices

ADVANCE WARNING SIGNS

The round, black-on- yellow warning sign is placed ahead of a public railroad-highway crossing. The
advance warning sign tells you to slow down, look and listen for the train, and be prepared to stop at
the tracks if a train is coming. All passenger and hazmat carrying vehicles are required to stop. See
Figure 2.15.

     Figure 2.15

PAVEMENT MARKINGS

Pavement markings mean the same as the advance warning sign. They consist of an "X" with the
letters "RR" and a no-passing marking on two-lane roads. See Figure 2.16.

103               Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
                                                            Figure 2.16

There is also a no passing zone sign on two-lane roads. There may be a white stop line painted on
the pavement before the railroad tracks. The front of the vehicle must remain behind this line while
stopped at the crossing.

CROSS-BUCK SIGNS
This sign marks the grade crossing. It requires you to yield the right-of-way to the train. If there is no
white stop line painted on the pavement, vehicles that are required to stop must stop no closer than
15 feet or more than 50 feet from the nearest rail of the nearest track. When the road crosses over
more than one track, a sign below the cross-buck indicates the number of tracks. See Figure 2.17.

     Figure 2.17

104               Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
FLASHING RED LIGHT SIGNALS

At many highway-rail grade crossings, the cross-buck sign has flashing red lights and bells. When the
lights begin to flash, stop! A train is approaching. You are required to yield the right-of-way to the
train. If there is more than one track, make sure all tracks are clear before crossing. See Figure 2.18.

GATES

Many railroad-highway crossings have gates with flashing red lights and bells. Stop when the lights
begin to flash and before the gate lowers across the road lane. Stay stopped until the gates go up
and the lights have stopped flashing. Proceed when it is safe. See Figure 2.18.

                                                            Figure 2.18

2.15.3 ­ Driving Procedures

NEVER RACE A TRAIN TO A CROSSING
Never attempt to race a train to a crossing. It is extremely difficult to judge the speed of an
approaching train.

REDUCE SPEED
You must reduce your speed according to your ability to see approaching trains in any direction
and must keep your speed to a point which will allow you to stop short of the tracks if you need to
stop.

105  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
DON'T EXPECT TO HEAR A TRAIN
Trains might not always sound their horn when they approach some crossings depending on
local laws. Public crossings where trains do not sound horns should be marked by signs. Noise
inside your vehicle may also prevent you from hearing the train horn until the train is dangerously
close to the crossing.

DON'T RELY ON SIGNALS
You should not rely only on the presence of warning signals, gates, or flagmen to warn of the
approach of trains. Be especially alert at crossings that do not have gates or flashing red light signals.

DOUBLE TRACKS REQUIRE A DOUBLE CHECK
Some railroad crossings may have two separate tracks to cross. Remember that a train on one
track may hide a train on the other track. Look both ways before crossing. After one train has cleared
a crossing, be sure no other trains are near before starting across the tracks.

RAIL YARD AREAS AND GRADE CROSSINGS IN CITIES AND TOWNS
Rail Yard areas and grade crossings in cities and towns are just as dangerous as rural grade
crossings. Approach them with as much caution.

2.15.4 ­ Stopping Safely at Railroad: Highway Crossings

A full stop is required at grade crossings whenever:
    · The nature of the cargo makes a stop mandatory under state or federal regulations.
    · Such a stop is otherwise required by law.

When stopping be sure to:
    · Check for traffic behind you while stopping gradually. Use a pullout lane, if available.
    · Turn on your four-way emergency flashers.

2.15.5 ­ Crossing the Tracks

Railroad crossings with steep approaches can cause your unit to get stuck on the tracks.
Never let traffic conditions trap you in a position where you have to stop on the tracks. Be sure you
can get all the way across the tracks before you start across. It takes a typical tractor-trailer unit at
least 14 seconds to clear a single track and more than 15 seconds to clear a double track.
Do not shift gears while crossing railroad tracks.

106  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.15.6 ­ Special Situations

Be Aware! These trailers can get stuck on raised crossings:

    · Low slung units (lowboy, car carrier, moving van, possum-belly, livestock trailer).
    · Single-axle tractor pulling a long trailer with its landing gear set to accommodate a tandem-

         axle tractor.

If for any reason you get stuck on the tracks, get out of the vehicle and away from the tracks. Check
signposts or signal housing at the crossing for emergency notification information. Call 911 or another
emergency number. Give the location of the crossing using all identifiable landmarks, especially the
DOT number, if posted.

2.16 ­ Mountain Driving

In mountain driving, gravity plays a major role. On any upgrade, gravity slows you down. The steeper
the grade, the longer the grade, and the heavier your load--the more you will have to use lower gears
to climb hills or mountains.

In coming down long, steep downgrades, gravity increases the speed of your vehicle. You must
select a safe speed, then use a low gear, and proper braking techniques. You should plan ahead and
get information about any long, steep grades along your planned route of travel. Talking to other
drivers who are familiar with the grades before your trip can be helpful in finding out what speeds are
safe.

You must go slow enough so your brakes can hold you back without getting too hot. If the brakes
become too hot, they may start to "fade." This means you have to apply them harder to get the same
stopping power. If you continue to use the brakes hard, they can keep fading until you cannot slow
down or stop at all.

2.16.1 ­ Select a "Safe" Speed

It is important to select a speed that is not too fast for the:

    · Total weight of the vehicle and cargo
    · Length of the grade
    · Steepness of the grade
    · Road conditions
    · Weather

If a speed limit is posted, or there is a "Maximum Safe Speed" sign, never go faster than the speed
shown. Look for and follow warning signs marking the length and steepness of the grade.

107  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
You must use the braking effect of the engine as the main way of controlling your speed. The braking
effect of the engine is greatest when it is near the governed RPMs and the transmission is in the
lower gears. Save your brakes so you will be able to slow or stop as required by road and traffic
conditions.

2.16.2 ­ Select the Right Gear Before Starting Down the Grade

Going "down the grade" means going down a long hill. To do this safely, you need to follow to make
sure you are in the right gear before you start going down the grade.

To do this, shift the transmission to a low gear before starting down the grade. Do not try to
downshift after your vehicle has sped up. You will not be able to shift into a lower gear. You may not
even be able to get back into any gear and all engine braking effect will be lost. Forcing an automatic
transmission into a lower gear at high speed could damage the transmission and also lead to loss of
all engine braking effect.

With some older trucks, a rule for choosing gears is to use the same gear going down a hill that you
would need to climb the hill. However, some newer trucks have low friction parts and streamlined
shapes for fuel economy. They may also have more powerful engines. This means they can go up
hills in higher gears and have less friction and air drag to hold them back going down hills. For that
reason, drivers of more modern trucks may have to use lower gears going down a hill than would be
required to go up the hill. You should know what is right for your vehicle.

2.16.3 ­ Brake Fading or Failure

Brakes work by pressing brake shoes or pads against the brake drum or discs to slow the vehicle.
Braking creates heat and brakes are designed to take a lot of heat. However, brakes can fade or fail
from too much heat caused by using them too often and not relying on the engine braking effect.
Brake fade is also affected by adjustment. To safely control a vehicle, every brake must be adjusted
properly to do its share of the work. The other brakes can then overheat and fade, and there will not
be enough braking available to control the vehicle. Brakes can get out of adjustment quickly,
especially when they are used a lot. Brake linings wear faster when they are hot. Therefore, brake
adjustment must be checked frequently.

2.16.4 ­ Proper Braking Technique

Remember: The use of brakes on a long or steep downgrade is only a supplement to the braking
effect of the engine. Once the vehicle is in the proper low gear, the following are the proper braking
techniques:

    · Apply the brakes just hard enough to feel a definite slowdown.
    · When your speed has been reduced to approximately five mph below your "safe" speed,

         release the brakes. (This brake application should last for about three seconds.)
    · When your speed has increased to your "safe" speed, repeat steps 1 and 2.

108  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
             o For Example: If your "safe" speed is 40 mph, you would not apply the brakes until your
                  speed reaches 40 mph. You now apply the brakes hard enough to gradually reduce
                  your speed to 35 mph and then release the brakes. Repeat this as often as necessary
                  until you have reached the end of the downgrade.

Escape ramps have been built on many steep mountain downgrades. Escape ramps are made to
stop runaway vehicles safely without injuring drivers and passengers. Escape ramps use a long bed
of loose, soft material to slow a runaway vehicle, sometimes in combination with an upgrade.
Know escape ramp locations on your route. Signs show drivers where ramps are located. Escape
ramps save lives, equipment and cargo.

Subsections 2.15 and 2.16 Test Your Knowledge

    1. What factors determine your selection of a "safe" speed when going down a long, steep
         downgrade?

    2. Why should you be in the proper gear before starting down a hill?
    3. Describe the proper braking technique when going down a long, steep downgrade.
    4. What type of vehicles can get stuck on a railroad-highway crossing?
    5. How long does it take for a typical tractor-trailer unit to clear a double track?
These questions may be on the test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsections 2.15 and 2.16.

2.17 ­ Driving Emergencies

Traffic emergencies occur when two vehicles are about to collide. Vehicle emergencies occur when
tires, brakes, or other critical parts fail. Following the safety practices in this manual can help prevent
emergencies. But if an emergency does happen, your chances of avoiding a crash depend upon how
well you act. Actions you can take are discussed below.

2.17.1 ­ Steering to Avoid a Crash

Stopping is not always the safest thing to do in an emergency. When you don't have enough room to
stop, you may have to steer away from what is ahead. Remember, you can almost always turn to
miss an obstacle more quickly than you can stop. However, top-heavy vehicles and tractors with
multiple trailers may flip over.

109  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
KEEP BOTH HANDS ON THE STEERING WHEEL

To turn quickly, you must have a firm grip on the steering wheel with both hands. The best way to
have both hands on the wheel, if there is an emergency, is to keep them there all the time.

HOW TO TURN QUICKLY AND SAFELY

A quick turn can be made safely, if it's done the right way. Here are some points that safe drivers use:

    · Do not apply the brake while you are turning. It's very easy to lock your wheels while turning. If
         that happens, you may skid out of control.

    · Do not turn any more than needed to clear whatever is in your way. The more sharply you turn,
         the greater the chances of a skid or rollover.

    · Be prepared to "counter-steer" or turn the wheel back in the other direction, once you've
         passed whatever was in your path. Unless you are prepared to counter-steer, you won't be
         able to do it quickly enough. You should think of emergency steering and counter-steering as
         two parts of one driving action.

WHERE TO STEER

If an oncoming driver has drifted into your lane, a move to your right is best. If that driver realizes
what has happened, the natural response will be to return to his or her own lane.

If something is blocking your path, the best direction to steer will depend on the situation.

If you have been using your mirrors, you'll know which lane is empty and can be safely used.

If the shoulder is clear, going right may be best. No one is likely to be driving on the shoulder but
someone may be passing you on the left. You will know if you have been using your mirrors.

If you are blocked on both sides, a move to the right may be best. At least you won't force anyone into
an opposing traffic lane and a possible head-on collision.

LEAVING THE ROAD

In some emergencies, you may have to drive off the road. It may be less risky than facing a collision
with another vehicle.

Most shoulders are strong enough to support the weight of a large vehicle and offer an available
escape route. Here are some guidelines, if you do leave the road:

    · Avoid Braking ­ If possible, avoid using the brakes until your speed has dropped to about 20
         mph. Then brake very gently to avoid skidding on a loose surface.

    · Keep One Set of Wheels on the Pavement, if Possible ­ This helps you keep control of your
         vehicle.

    · Stay on the Shoulder ­ If the shoulder is clear, stay on it until your vehicle has come to a
         stop. Signal and check your mirrors before pulling back onto the road.

110  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Returning to the Road ­ If you are forced to return to the road before you can stop, use the
         following procedure:
             o Hold the wheel tightly and turn sharply enough to get back on the road safely. Don't try
                  to edge gradually back on the road. If you do, your tires might grab unexpectedly and
                  you could lose control.
             o When both front tires are on the paved surface, counter-steer immediately. The two
                  turns should be made as a single "steer-counter-steer" move.

2.17.2 ­ How to Stop Quickly and Safely

If somebody suddenly pulls out in front of you, your natural response is to hit the brakes. This is a
good response if there's enough distance to stop, and you use the brakes correctly.

You should brake in a way that will keep your vehicle in a straight line and allow you to turn if needed.
You can use the "controlled braking" method or the "stab braking" method.

CONTROLLED BRAKING

With this method, you apply the brakes as hard as you can without locking the wheels. Keep steering
wheel movements very small while doing this. If you need to make a larger steering adjustment or if
the wheels lock, release the brakes. Re-apply the brakes as soon as you can.

STAB BRAKING

With this method, you apply your brakes all the way and release brakes when wheels lock up. As
soon as the wheels start rolling, apply the brakes fully again. It can take up to one second for the
wheels to start rolling after you release the brakes. If you re-apply the brakes before the wheels start
rolling, the vehicle won't straighten out.

DON'T SLAM ON THE BRAKES

Emergency braking does not mean pushing down on the brake pedal as hard as you can. That will
only keep the wheels locked up and cause a skid. If the wheels are skidding, you cannot control the
vehicle.

2.17.3 ­ Brake Failure

Brake failure means your brakes stop working. Brakes kept in good condition rarely fail. Most
hydraulic brake failures happen because of loss of hydraulic pressure or brake fade on long hills. For
information about air brakes, read Section 5.

111  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
LOSS OF HYDRAULIC PRESSURE

When the system won't build up pressure, the brake pedal will feel spongy or go to the floor. Here are
some things you can do.

    · Downshift ­ Putting the vehicle into a lower gear will help to slow the vehicle.
    · Pump the Brakes ­ Sometimes pumping the brake pedal will generate enough hydraulic

         pressure to stop the vehicle.
    · Use the Parking Brake ­ The parking or emergency brake is separate from the hydraulic

         brake system. Therefore, it can be used to slow the vehicle. However, be sure to press the
         release button or pull the release lever at the same time you use the emergency brake so you
         can adjust the brake pressure and keep the wheels from locking up.
    · Find an Escape Route ­ While slowing the vehicle, look for an escape route--an open field,
         side-street, or escape ramp. Turning uphill is a good way to slow and stop the vehicle. Make
         sure the vehicle does not start rolling backward after you stop. Put it in low gear, apply the
         parking brake, and, if necessary, roll back into some obstacle that will stop the vehicle.

BRAKE FAILURE ON DOWNGRADES

Going slow enough and braking properly will almost always prevent brake failure on long
downgrades. However, once the brakes have failed you are going to have to look for something else
outside your vehicle to stop it.

USE AN ESCAPE RAMP

Your best option is an escape ramp. If there is one, there'll be signs telling you about it. Use it. Ramps
are usually located a few miles from the top of the downgrade. Every year, hundreds of drivers avoid
injury to themselves or damage to their vehicles by using escape ramps. Some escape ramps use
soft gravel that resists the motion of the vehicle and brings it to a stop. Others turn uphill, using the hill
to stop the vehicle and soft gravel to hold it in place.

Any driver who loses brakes going downhill should use an escape ramp if it's available. If you don't
use it, your chances of having a serious crash are much greater.

If no escape ramp is available, take the least hazardous escape route you can, such as an open field
or a side road that flattens out or turns uphill. Make the move as soon as you know your brakes don't
work. The longer you wait, the faster the vehicle will go, and the harder it will be to stop.

2.17.4 ­ Tire Failure

RECOGNIZE TIRE FAILURE

Quickly knowing you have a tire failure will let you have more time to react. Having just a few extra
seconds to remember what it is you're supposed to do can help you. The major signs of tire failure
are:

112  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Sound ­ The loud "bang" of a blowout is an easily recognized sign. Because it can take a few
         seconds for your vehicle to react, you might think it was some other vehicle. But any time you
         hear a tire blow, you'd be safest to assume it is yours.

    · Vibration ­ If the vehicle thumps or vibrates heavily, it may be a sign that one of the tires has
         gone flat. With a rear tire, that may be the only sign you get.

    · Feel ­ If the steering feels "heavy," it is probably a sign that one of the front tires has failed.
         Sometimes, failure of a rear tire will cause the vehicle to slide back and forth or "fishtail."
         However, dual rear tires usually prevent this.

RESPOND TO TIRE FAILURE

When a tire fails, your vehicle is in danger. You must immediately:

    · Hold the Steering Wheel Firmly ­ If a front tire fails, it can twist the steering wheel out of your
         hand. The only way to prevent this is to always keep a firm grip on the steering wheel with both
         hands.

    · Stay off the Brake ­ It's natural to want to brake in an emergency. However, braking when a
         tire has failed could cause loss of control. Unless you're about to run into something, stay off
         the brake until the vehicle has slowed down. Then brake very gently, pull off the road, and
         stop.

    · Check the Tires ­ After you've come to a stop, get out and check all the tires. Do this even if
         the vehicle seems to be handling all right. If one of your dual tires goes, the only way you may
         know it is by getting out and looking at it.

2.18 ­ Antilock Braking Systems (ABS)

ABS is a computerized system that keeps your wheels from locking up during hard brake
applications.
ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does not decrease or increase your normal braking
capability. ABS only activates when wheels are about to lock up.
ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle under
control during hard braking.

2.18.1 ­ How Antilock Braking Systems Work

Sensors detect potential wheel lock up. An electronic control unit (ECU) will then decrease brake
pressure to avoid wheel lockup.
Brake pressure is adjusted to provide the maximum braking without danger of lockup.

113  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
ABS works far faster than the driver can respond to potential wheel lockup. At all other times the
brake system will operate normally.

2.18.2 ­ Vehicles Required to Have Antilock Braking Systems

The Department of Transportation requires that ABS be on:

    · Truck tractors with air brakes built on or after March 1, 1997.
    · Other air brake vehicles (trucks, buses, trailers, and converter dollies) that were built on or

         after March 1, 1998.
    · Hydraulically braked trucks and buses with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 lbs. or more

         built on or after March 1, 1999.

Many commercial vehicles built before these dates have been voluntarily equipped with ABS.

2.18.3 ­ How to Know if Your Vehicle is Equipped with ABS

    · Tractors, trucks, and buses ­ Will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on the
         instrument panel.

    · Trailers ­ Will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on the left side, either on the front or
         rear corner.

    · Dollies ­ Manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, are required to have a lamp on the left side.

As a system check on newer vehicles, the malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb check
and then goes out quickly. On older systems, the lamp could stay on until you are driving over
five mph.

If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes on once you are underway, you may have lost
ABS control.

In the case of towed units manufactured before it was required by the Department of Transportation,
it may be difficult to tell if the unit is equipped with ABS. Look under the vehicle for the Electronic
Control Unit (ECU) and wheel speed sensor wires coming from the back of the brakes.

2.18.4 ­ How ABS Helps You

When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up. When
your steering wheels lock up, you lose steering control. When your other wheels lock up, you may
skid, jackknife, or even spin the vehicle.

ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up and maintain control. You may or may not be able to stop faster
with ABS, but you should be able to steer around an obstacle while braking, and avoid skids caused
by over braking.

114  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.18.5 ­ If ABS is Only on the Tractor or is Only on the Trailer

Having ABS on only the tractor, only the trailer, or even on only one axle, still gives you more control
over the vehicle during braking. Brake normally.

When only the tractor has ABS, you should be able to maintain steering control, and there is less
chance of jackknifing. But keep your eye on the trailer and let up on the brakes (if you can safely do
so) if it begins to swing out.

When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control or
start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if you can safely do so) until you regain control.

2.18.6 ­ Braking with ABS

When you drive a vehicle with ABS, you should brake as you always have. In other words:

    · Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely and stay in control.
    · Brake the same way, regardless of whether you have ABS on the bus, tractor, trailer, or both.
    · As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so)

         to stay in control.

There is only one exception to this procedure. If you drive a straight truck or combination with working
ABS on all axles, you can fully apply the brakes in an emergency stop.

2.18.7 ­ Braking if ABS is Not Working

Without ABS you still have normal brake functions. Drive and brake as you always have.

Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps to tell you if something isn't working.

As a system check on newer vehicles, the malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb check
and then goes out quickly. On older systems, the lamp could stay on until you are driving over five
mph.

If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes on once you are underway, you may have lost ABS
control on one or more wheels.

Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still have regular brakes. Drive normally but get the system
serviced soon.

2.18.8 ­ Safety Reminders

ABS will not allow you to drive faster, follow more closely, or drive less carefully.

ABS will not prevent power or turning skids. ABS should prevent brake-induced skids or
jackknifes, but not those caused by spinning the drive wheels or going too fast in a turn.

115  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
ABS will not necessarily reduce stopping distance. ABS will help maintain vehicle control but not
always reduce stopping distance.

ABS will not increase or decrease ultimate stopping power. ABS is an "add-on" to your normal
brakes, not a replacement for them.

ABS will not change the way you normally brake. Under normal brake conditions, your vehicle will
stop as it always stopped. ABS only starts to work when a wheel would normally have locked up
because of over braking.

ABS will not compensate for bad brakes or for not taking care of the brakes and having
regular maintenance.

   REMEMBER: The best vehicle safety feature is still a safe driver.

   REMEMBER: Drive so you never need to use your ABS.

   REMEMBER: If you need it, ABS could help to prevent serious crashes.

2.19 ­ Skid Control and Recovery

A skid happens whenever the tires lose their grip on the road. This is caused in one of four ways:

    · Over-braking ­ Braking too hard and locking up the wheels. Skids also can occur when using
         the speed retarder when the road is slippery.

    · Over-steering ­ Turning the wheels more sharply than the vehicle can turn.
    · Over-acceleration ­ Applying too much power, such as pressing the accelerator too hard,

         causing them to spin.
    · Driving Too Fast ­ Most serious skids result from driving too fast for road conditions. Drivers

         who adjust their driving to conditions don't over- accelerate and don't have to over-brake or
         over-steer from too much speed.

2.19.1 ­ Drive-Wheel Skids

By far the most common skid is one in which the rear wheels lose traction through excessive braking
or acceleration. Skids caused by acceleration usually happen on ice or snow. Taking your foot off the
accelerator can easily stop them. If it is very slippery, push the clutch in. Otherwise, the engine can
keep the wheels from rolling freely and regaining traction.

Rear wheel braking skids occur when the rear drive wheels lock. Because locked wheels have less
traction than rolling wheels, the rear wheels usually slide sideways to "catch up" with the front wheels.
In a bus or straight truck, the vehicle will slide sideways in a "spin out." With vehicles towing trailers, a

116                               Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
drive-wheel skid can let the trailer push the towing vehicle sideways, causing a sudden jackknife. See
Figure 2.19.

     Figure 2.19

2.19.2 ­ Correcting a Drive-wheel Braking Skid

Do the following to correct a drive-wheel braking skid.

    · Stop Braking ­ This will let the rear wheels roll again and keep the rear wheels from sliding.
    · Counter-steer ­ As a vehicle turns back on course, it usually keeps on turning. Unless you

         turn the steering wheel the other way quickly, you may find yourself skidding in the opposite
         direction.

Learning to stay off the brake, turn the steering wheel quickly, push in the clutch, and counter-steer in
a skid takes a lot of practice. The best place to get this practice is on a large driving range or "skid
pad."

2.19.3 ­ Front-wheel Skids

Driving too fast for conditions causes most front-wheel skids. Other causes include lack of tread on
the front tires and cargo loaded so not enough weight is on the front axle. In a front-wheel skid, the

117               Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
front end tends to go in a straight line regardless of how much you turn the steering wheel. On a very
slippery surface, you may not be able to steer around a curve or turn.

When a front-wheel skid occurs, the only way to stop the skid is to let the vehicle slow down. Stop
turning or braking so hard. Slow down as quickly as possible without skidding.

Subsections 2.17, 2.18, and 2.19 Test Your Knowledge

    1. Stopping is not always the safest thing to do in an emergency. True or False?
    2. What are some advantages of going right instead of left around an obstacle?
    3. What is an "escape ramp?"
    4. If a tire blows out, you should put the brakes on hard to stop quickly. True or False?
    5. How do you know if your vehicle has antilock brakes?
    6. What is the proper braking technique when driving a vehicle with antilock brakes?
    7. How do antilock brakes help you?

These questions may be on the test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsections 2.17, 2.18,
and 2.19.

2.20 ­ Crash Procedures

When you're in a crash and not seriously hurt, you need to act to prevent further damage or injury.
The basic steps to be taken at any crash are to:

    · Protect the area.
    · Notify authorities.
    · Care for the injured.

2.20.1 ­ Protect the Area

The first thing to do at a crash scene is to keep another crash from happening in the same spot. To
protect the crash area:

    · If your vehicle is involved in the crash, try to get it to the side of the road. This will help prevent
         another crash and allow traffic to move.

    · If you're stopping to help, park away from the crash. The area immediately around the crash
         will be needed for emergency vehicles.

118                      Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Put on your flashers.
    · Set out reflective triangles to warn other traffic. Make sure other drivers can see them in time

         to avoid the crash scene.

2.20.2 ­ Notify Authorities

Call for assistance before you get out of your vehicle. Try to determine where you are so you can give
the exact location.

2.20.3 ­ Care for the Injured

If a qualified person is at the accident and helping the injured, stay out of the way unless asked to
assist. Otherwise, do the best you can to help any injured parties. Here are some simple steps to
follow in giving assistance:

    · Don't move a severely injured person unless the danger of fire or passing traffic makes it
         necessary.

    · Stop heavy bleeding by applying direct pressure to the wound.
    · Keep the injured person warm.

2.21 ­ Fires

Truck fires can cause damage and injury. Learn the causes of fires and how to prevent them. Know
what to do to put out fires.

2.21.1 ­ Causes of Fire

The following are some causes of vehicle fires:
After crashes. Spilled fuel, improper use of flares.
Tires. Under-inflated tires and duals that touch.
Electrical System. Short circuits due to damaged insulation, loose connections.
Fuel. Driver smoking, improper fueling, loose fuel connections.
Cargo. Flammable cargo, improperly sealed or loaded cargo, poor ventilation.

119  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.21.2 ­ Fire Prevention

Pay attention to the following:

Vehicle Inspection. Make a complete inspection of the electrical, fuel, and exhaust systems, tires,
and cargo. Be sure to check that the fire extinguisher is charged.

During Trip Inspection. Check the tires, wheels, and truck body for signs of heat whenever you stop
during a trip.

Follow Safe Procedures. Follow correct safety procedures for fueling the vehicle, using brakes,
handling flares, and other activities that can cause a fire.

Monitoring. Check the instruments and gauges often for signs of overheating and use the mirrors to
look for signs of smoke from tires or the vehicle.

Caution. Use normal caution in handling anything flammable.

2.21.3 ­ Fire Fighting

Knowing how to fight fires is important. Drivers who didn't know what to do have made fires worse.
Know how the fire extinguisher works. Read the instructions printed on the extinguisher before you
need it. Here are some procedures to follow in case of fire.

PULL OFF THE ROAD

The first step is to get the vehicle off the road and stop. In doing so:

    · Park in an open area, away from buildings, trees, brush, other vehicles, or anything that might
         catch fire. Don't pull into a gas station / service station.

    · Notify emergency services of your problem and your location.
    · Keep the Fire from Spreading. Before trying to put out the fire, make sure that it doesn't

         spread any further.

With an engine fire, turn off the engine as soon as you can. Don't open the hood if you can avoid it.

For a cargo fire in a van or box trailer, keep the doors shut, especially if your cargo contains
hazardous materials. Opening the van doors will supply the fire with oxygen and can cause it to burn
very fast.

EXTINGUISH THE FIRE

Here are some rules to follow in putting out a fire:

    · When using the extinguisher, stay as far away from the fire as possible.
    · Position yourself upwind. Let the wind carry the extinguisher to the fire.

120  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Aim at the source or base of the fire, not up in the flames.
    · Shoot foam through louvers, radiator, or from the vehicle's underside.

USE THE RIGHT FIRE EXTINGUISHER
Figures 2.20 and 2.21 detail the type of fire extinguisher to use by class of fire.
The B:C type fire extinguisher is designed to work on electrical fires and burning liquids.
The A:B:C type is designed to work on burning wood, paper, and cloth as well.
Water can be used on wood, paper, or cloth, but don't use water on an electrical fire (can cause
shock) or a gasoline fire (it will spread the flames).
A burning tire must be cooled. Lots of water may be required.
If you're not sure what to use, especially on a hazardous materials fire, wait for firefighters.
Continue until what was burning has cooled. Just because you don't see smoke or flames, doesn't
mean the fire can't start again.

     Class  Figure 2.20: Class/Type of Fires
       A
       B     Type
             Wood, Paper, Ordinary Combustibles
       C     Extinguish by cooling and quenching using water or dry chemicals
       D
             Gasoline, Oil, Grease, Other Greasy Liquids
             Extinguish by smothering, cooling, or heat shielding using carbon dioxide or dry
             chemicals

             Electrical Equipment Fires
             Extinguish with non-conducting agents such as carbon dioxide or dry chemicals.
             DO NOT USE WATER.

             Fires in Combustible Metals
             Extinguish by using specialized extinguishing powders

121         Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
     Figure 2.21: Class of Fire/Type of Extinguisher

Class of Fire  Fire Extinguisher Type
B or C         Regular Dry Chemical
A, B, C, or D  Multi-Purpose Dry Chemical
D              Purple K Dry Chemical
B or C         KCL Dry Chemical
D              Dry Powder Special Compound
B or C         Carbon Dioxide (Dry)
B or C         Halogenated Agent (Gas)
A              Water
A              Water With Anti-Freeze
A or B         Water, Loaded Steam Style
B, on some A   Foam

Subsections 2.20 and 2.21 Test Your Knowledge

    1. What are some things to do at a crash scene to prevent another crash?
    2. Name two causes of tire fires.
    3. What kinds of fires are a B:C extinguisher not good for?
    4. When using your extinguisher, should you get as close as possible to the fire?
    5. Name some causes of vehicle fires.
These questions may be on the test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsections 2.20 and 2.21.

122                                         Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.22 ­ Alcohol, Other Drugs, and Driving

2.22.1 ­ Alcohol, Drugs and Driving

Driving drunk or on drugs is a very serious threat to everyone's safety. Alcohol and drugs impair your
ability to drive. This means they make it very difficult or impossible for you to drive safely.

Blood alcohol concentration (BAC) is a measurement of the amount of alcohol in your blood.
Maryland considers drivers to be driving under the influence of alcohol when their blood alcohol
concentration is .08 or higher. Even though Maryland's limit for drunk driving is .08, any amount of
alcohol can affect your ability to safely drive a vehicle. Your judgment and physical coordination may
be impaired at a much lower BAC and could result in criminal charges. For example, your vision,
ability to perform simple movements, and reaction time may be affected with just one drink and can
increase the risk of a crash.

It is very difficult to know your own BAC or how alcohol affects your ability to drive. You cannot simply
tell by the number of drinks you had because many things can affect how your body digests alcohol.
This includes your weight, body fat, how long ago you ate, and how much you ate. How tired you are,
your mood, and medications can also make a difference in how alcohol affects your ability to drive.

     Figure 2.22

123               Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
     Figure 2.23

UNDER 21 ­ ALCOHOL NOT ALLOWED

If you are not yet 21 years old, it is against the law for you to drink alcohol. If law enforcement stops
you and you have been drinking, your license will be suspended or revoked. If that happens, you will
not be allowed to drive. Also, you could be charged with violating the alcohol restriction on your
license.

OPEN ALCOHOL CONTAINER

It is against the law to drive with an open container of alcohol in the passenger area of the vehicle. An
open container is any open can, bottle, other type of container, or package. A six-pack of alcohol with
open, empty, or missing bottles/cans can be considered an open container.

124               Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
The passenger area of a vehicle includes:

    · The driver and passenger seats.
    · Any place the driver or passengers can easily reach from where they are sitting.

2.22.2 ­ Controlled Dangerous Substances (CDS):
Illegal and Prescription Drugs

Illegal drugs, some prescription medications, and chemical inhalants can severely impair your ability
to drive safely. They can affect your alertness, concentration, coordination, and reaction time. All
drugs can make it hard to judge distances and react to signals and sounds on the road. Your license
can be suspended or revoked for driving while on controlled dangerous substances. It is important to
pay close attention to label warnings on prescription and over-the-counter drugs. Look for warnings
that tell you not to drive or use heavy machinery when taking the medication. If you drive after taking
a medication that tells you not to and it impairs your ability to drive safely, you could be charged with
a crime.

2.22.3 ­ Illness

Once in a while, you may become so ill that you cannot use a motor vehicle safely. If this happens,
you must not drive. However, in case of an emergency, you may drive to the nearest place where you
can safely stop.

2.22.4 ­ FMCSA's Drug and Alcohol Clearinghouse

The Clearinghouse has information about holders of commercial driver's licenses (CDLs) and
commercial learner's permits (CLPs) who are covered by FMCSA's Drug and Alcohol Testing
Program.

CLEARINGHOUSE STATUS AND CDL DOWNGRADES

As of November 18, 2024, having a "prohibited" Clearinghouse status will result in losing or being
denied a commercial driver's license (CDL) or commercial learner's permit (CLP). Read more about
how a driver's Clearinghouse status affects CDL eligibility.

Drivers in a "prohibited" Clearinghouse status must complete the return-to-duty (RTD) process to
become eligible for a CDL or CLP. Learn about the steps a driver takes to get back to being "not
prohibited".

Learn more: Read the second Clearinghouse final rule.

125  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
2.23 ­ Hazardous Materials Rules for All Commercial Drivers

All drivers should know something about hazardous materials. You must be able to recognize
hazardous cargo, and you must know whether you can haul it without having a hazardous materials
endorsement on your CDL.

2.23.1 ­ What Are Hazardous Materials?

Hazardous materials are products that pose a risk to health, safety, and property during
transportation. See Figure 2.24.

            Figure 2.24: Hazard Class Definitions

     Class  Class Name                                  Example
        1   Explosives                                  Ammunition, Dynamite, Fireworks
        2   Gases                                       Propane, Oxygen, Helium
        3   Flammable                                   Gasoline, Acetone
        4   Flammable Solids                            Matches, Fuses
        5   Oxidizers                                   Ammonium Nitrate, Hydrogen
                                                        Peroxide
       6    Poisons                                     Pesticides, Arsenic
       7    Radioactive                                 Uranium, Plutonium
       8    Corrosives                                  Hydrochloric Acid, Battery Fluid
       9    Miscellaneous Hazardous Materials           Formaldehyde, Asbestos
     None   ORM-D (Other Regulated Material- Domestic)  Hair Spray or Charcoal
     None   Combustible Liquids                         Fuel Oils, Lighter Fluid

2.23.2 ­ What Are the Rules

You must follow many rules about transporting hazardous materials. The intent of the rules is to:

126                                                     Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
    · Contain the product.
    · Communicate the risk.
    · Keep drivers and equipment safe.

To Contain the Product. Many hazardous products can injure or kill on contact. To protect drivers
and others from contact, the rules tell shippers how to pack safely. Similar rules tell drivers how to
load, transport, and unload bulk tanks. These are containment rules.

To Communicate the Risk. The shipper uses a shipping paper and diamond shaped hazard labels
to warn dockworkers and drivers of the risk.

After an accident or hazardous material spill or leak, you may be injured and unable to communicate
the hazards of the materials you are transporting. Firefighters and police can prevent or reduce the
amount of damage or injury at the scene if they know what hazardous materials are being
transported. Your life, and the lives of others, may depend on quickly finding the hazardous materials
shipping papers.

You must keep hazardous shipping papers:

    · In a pouch on the driver's door, or
    · In clear view within reach while driving, or
    · On the driver's seat when out of the vehicle.

2.23.3 ­ Lists of Regulated Products

Placards are used to warn others of hazardous materials. Placards are signs put on the outside of a
vehicle that identify the hazard class of the cargo. A placarded vehicle must have at least four
identical placards. They are put on the front, rear, and both sides of the vehicle.

Placards must be readable from all four directions. They must be at least 9.84 inches square, turned
upright on a point, in a diamond shape. Cargo tanks and other bulk packaging display the
identification number of their contents on placards or orange panels. See Figure 2.25 for examples of
hazardous material placards.

Identification Numbers are a four-digit code used by first responders to identify hazardous
materials. An identification number may be used to identify more than one chemical on shipping
papers. The identification number will be preceded by the letters "NA" or "UN". The US DOT
Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG) lists the chemicals and the identification numbers assigned
to them.

Not all vehicles carrying hazardous materials need to have placards. The rules about placards are
given in Section 9 of this manual. You can drive a vehicle that carries hazardous materials if it does
not require placards. If it requires placards, you cannot drive it unless your commercial driver's
license has the hazardous materials endorsement.

127  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
     Figure 2.25

The rules require all drivers of placarded vehicles to learn how to safely load and transport hazardous
products. You must have a commercial driver's license with the hazardous materials endorsement.
To get the endorsement, you must pass a written test on material found in Section 9 of this manual.

A tank endorsement is needed for any commercial vehicle designed to transport any liquid or
gaseous materials in:

    · A single tank with an individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons or

    · Multiple tanks with a total capacity of 1,000 gallons or more

The tanks can be either permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or chassis. The liquid or
gas does not have to be a hazardous material.

Drivers who need the hazardous materials endorsement must learn the placard rules. If you do not
know if your vehicle needs placards, ask your employer. It is a crime to drive a vehicle needing
placards without having the hazardous materials endorsement. When stopped by law enforcement,
you will be cited, and you will not be allowed to drive your truck. A failure to placard when needed
may risk your life and others if you have a crash. Emergency help will not know of your hazardous
cargo.

Drivers of hazardous materials must also know which products they can load together, and which
they cannot. These rules are also in Section 9. Before loading a truck with more than one type of

128               Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
product, you must know if it is safe to load them together. If you do not know, ask your employer and
consult the regulations.

Subsections 2.22 and 2.23 Test Your Knowledge

    1. Common medicines for colds can make you sleepy. True or False?
    2. Coffee and a little fresh air will help a drinker sober up. True or False?
    3. What is a hazardous materials placard?
    4. Why are placards used?
These questions may be on the test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsections 2.22 and 2.23.

129  Section 2: Knowledge Test Background
Section 3: Transporting Cargo Safely

This Section Covers:
    · Inspecting Cargo
    · Cargo Weight and Balance
    · Securing Cargo
    · Cargo Needing Special Attention

This section tells you about hauling cargo safely. You must understand basic cargo safety rules to get
a CDL.
Loose or unsecured cargo can be a danger to yourself and others if it falls off a vehicle.
Loose cargo that falls off a vehicle can cause traffic problems and others could be hurt or killed.
Loose cargo could hurt or kill you during a quick stop or crash.
Overloading your vehicle with too much cargo could damage it.
If all of your cargo is loaded on one side of the vehicle, it could make it harder to steer the vehicle.
Even if you don't load and secure the cargo yourself, you are responsible for:

    · Inspecting your cargo.
    · Recognizing overloads and poorly balanced weight.
    · Knowing your cargo is properly secured and does not block your view ahead or to the sides.
    · Knowing your cargo does not restrict your access to emergency equipment.
If you plan to drive a truck that carries hazardous materials that require a placard, you will also need
to have a hazardous materials endorsement. Section 9 of this manual has the information you need
to pass the hazardous materials test.

3.1 ­ Inspecting Cargo

When you check your vehicle, make sure the truck is not carrying too much weight and the cargo is
balanced and tied down safely.

130  Section 3: Transporting Cargo Safely
3.1.1 ­ After Starting Your Trip.

Check the cargo and how it's tied down again within the first 50 miles of your trip. Fix anything that
needs to be adjusted.

3.1.2 ­ Check Again as Needed.

It is important to check your cargo often and make sure it is safely tied down. You may need to check
your cargo more often during a trip, but you should always inspect again:

    · After you have driven for 3 hours or 150 miles.
    · Any time you stop to take a break.
    · Rules about how much your commercial vehicle can weigh, how to secure and cover your

         cargo, and where you can drive large vehicles are different in each area. Make sure you know
         the rules for the places you'll be driving.

3.2 ­ Weight and Balance

You must know how much weight your vehicle can hold. The manufacturer of each vehicle will say
how much it can carry, including the cargo, driver, passengers, and any accessories. You must know
what your vehicle can carry safely.

3.2.1 ­ Definitions You Should Know

Axle Weight. The weight one axle or a group of axles on a vehicle can carry.

Coupling Device Capacity. The maximum weight a coupling device (like a hitch or connector) can
safely pull or carry, set by the manufacturer

Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR). The maximum total weight a vehicle can carry, set by the
manufacturer.

Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR). The highest total weight the manufacturer says the
power unit (like the truck) and the trailer(s) can weigh together. It's either the number on the Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS) certification label or the combined gross vehicle weight
ratings (GVWRs) or the gross vehicle weights (GVWs) of the truck and trailer(s)

   NOTE: Gross vehicle weight is only used by roadside enforcement to figure out whether the
   driver/vehicle is subject to CDL regulations. It is not used to figure out if a vehicle is
   representative for the purposes of Skills testing.

131  Section 3: Transporting Cargo Safely
Suspension Systems. Suspension systems have a manufacturer's maximum limit for weight
capacity, known as the weight capacity rating.

Tire Load. The maximum weight a tire can safely carry at a specified pressure. This rating is marked
on the side of each tire.

3.2.2 ­ Legal Weight Limits

You must keep weights within legal limits. States have maximums for Gross Vehicle Weight Rating
(GVWRs), Gross Combined Weight Rating (GCWRs), and axle weights.

The largest axle weight allowed on each axle is usually set by a "bridge formula." This bridge
formula lowers the weight allowed for axles that are closer together. This is to help protect bridges
and roads from too much weight. You'll often see these signs near bridges showing weight limits.
Bridge weight restriction signs are generally placed near the bridge.

Overloading can have bad effects on a vehicle. It makes it harder to steer, stop, and control. On hills,
it causes problems both ways. The truck goes too slow uphill and too fast downhill. It also takes
longer to stop, and if the brakes work too hard for too long, they can overheat or even fail.

During bad weather or in mountains, it may not be safe to carry a full load. Always think about the
weather and the road before driving.

     Figure 3

3.2.3 ­ Don't be Top-heavy

Where the weight sits in your vehicle affects how safely you can drive. If cargo is piled up too high or
too heavy on the top, your vehicle's center of gravity rises, and you are more likely to tip over.

132            Section 3: Transporting Cargo Safely
This is most dangerous on curves, sharp turns, or if you have to swerve to avoid a hazard. If your
cargo is loaded with a high center of gravity, you have a greater chance of rollover when taking sharp
turns. To stay safe, you should load the heaviest parts of your cargo on the bottom, and the lighter
parts are on top, keeping the weight as low as possible.

3.2.4 ­ Balance the Weight

Having the wrong weight balance can make your vehicle hard to control. Too much weight on the
front axle can make it hard to steer. It can damage the steering axle and tires.

If there is too little weight on the front axle because the weight has moved to the back, steering can
become unsafe. Also, if the driving axles don't have enough weight, your tires may slip more easily,
especially in bad weather. This can make it hard to keep moving.

On flatbed vehicles, not having weight balance can make it more likely the load will shift to the side or
fall off. See Figure 3.1.

     Figure 3.1

133              Section 3: Transporting Cargo Safely
3.3 ­ Securing Cargo

3.3.1 ­ Blocking and Bracing

Blocking is a way to keep your cargo from sliding. It may be used in the front, back, and sides of
your cargo to keep it from moving. Blocking is shaped to fit snugly against cargo. It is attached to the
cargo floor to stop cargo from moving.

Bracing also keeps cargo from moving. It goes from the top of the cargo to the floor or walls of the
cargo area.

3.3.2 ­ Cargo Tie-down

On flatbed trailers or trailers without sides, cargo must be secured to keep it from shifting or falling off.
In closed vans, tie-downs can also be important to prevent cargo from moving or shifting because this
could make your vehicle harder to control. Federal rules say that the total strength of the securement
system (the system you use to secure your cargo) must be at least half the weight of the cargo.

For example, if your load weighs 20,000 pounds, the securement system must hold at least 10,000
pounds.

You must use the right tie-down equipment, including ropes, straps, chains, and tension devices like
winches, ratchets, and clinching components. Tie-downs like hooks, bolts, rails, and rings must be
attached to the vehicle correctly. See Figure 3.2.

     Figure 3.2

134              Section 3: Transporting Cargo Safely
Cargo should have at least one tie-down for each ten feet of cargo. Make sure you have enough tie-
downs to meet this need. No matter how small the cargo is, it should have at least two tie-downs.

There are special requirements for securing various heavy metal pieces. Find out what they are if you
must carry these types of loads.

3.3.3 ­ Header Boards

Front-end header boards, sometimes called headache racks, protect you from your cargo in case of a
crash or emergency stop. Make sure the front-end structure is in good condition. The front-end
structure should block the forward movement of any cargo you carry.

3.3.4 ­ Covering Cargo

There are two basic reasons for covering cargo: protecting people from spilled cargo and protecting
cargo from weather.

Spill protection is a safety requirement in many states. Be familiar with the laws in the states and
local jurisdictions you drive in.

You should look at your cargo covers in the mirrors from time to time while driving. A flapping cover
can tear loose, uncover the cargo, and possibly block your view or someone else's. If your cover is
loose, you should stop and secure it.

3.3.5 ­ Sealed and Containerized Loads

Containers are used when freight is carried part of the way by train or ship. Trucks can deliver at the
beginning or end of the trip. Some containers have their own tiedown devices or locks that attach
directly to a special frame. Some containers have to be loaded onto flatbed trailers. They must be
properly secured just like any other cargo.

You can't inspect sealed loads, but you should still make sure you don't go over the total weight or
axle weight limits.

3.4 ­ Cargo Needing Special Attention

3.4.1 ­ Dry Bulk

Dry bulk tanks need special care because they have a high center of gravity, and the load can shift.
Be extremely cautious when going around curves and making sharp turns. Drive slowly.

135  Section 3: Transporting Cargo Safely
3.4.2 ­ Hanging Meat

Hanging meat like suspended beef, pork, or lamb, can be a very unstable load with a high center of
gravity. Extra caution is needed on sharp curves such as off ramps and on ramps. Drive slowly.

3.4.3 ­ Livestock

Livestock can move around in a trailer, which can make your vehicle hard to control. When the trailer
isn't full, use false bulkheads ­ removal walls or barriers - to keep livestock grouped together. This
helps stop them from moving too much and shifting weight. Even when animals are grouped, be
careful on curves, because livestock can lean shift the weight, which makes vehicle rollover more
likely.

3.4.4 ­ Oversized Loads

If your load is too long, too wide, or too high, you need special permits to drive. You're usually only
allowed to drive with an overweight load during certain times. You may need to use special
equipment such as "wide load" signs, flashing lights, or flags. You may need to travel with a police
escort or pilot vehicles displaying warning signs and flashing lights. These special loads require extra
careful driving.
Make sure you know the laws in the states and local jurisdictions where you'll be driving.

Section 3 Test Your Knowledge

    1. What four things related to cargo are drivers responsible for?
    2. How often do you need to stop while on the road to check your cargo?
    3. How is Gross Combination Weight Rating different from Gross Combination Weight?
    4. Name two situations where legal maximum weights may not be safe.
    5. What can happen if you don't have enough weight on the front axle?
    6. What is the minimum number of tie-downs needed for any flatbed load?
    7. What is the minimum number of tie-downs needed for a 20-foot load?
    8. Name the two basic reasons for covering cargo on an open bed.
    9. What do you need to check before transporting a sealed load?
These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read Section 3.

136  Section 3: Transporting Cargo Safely
Section 4: Transporting Passengers Safely

This Section Covers
    1. Vehicle Inspection
    2. Loading
    3. On the Road
    4. After-trip Vehicle Inspection
    5. Prohibited Practices
    6. Use of Brake-door Interlocks

Bus drivers must have a commercial driver's license if they drive a vehicle designed to seat 16 or
more people, including the driver.
Bus drivers must have the letter P on their commercial driver's license. The letter P stands for the
Passenger endorsement on their commercial driver license.
School Bus Driver is a separate endorsement. See Section 10 for more information.
To get the P endorsement, you must pass a knowledge test on Sections 2 and 4 of this manual.
If your bus has air brakes, you must also pass a knowledge test on Section 5.
You must also pass the skills tests needed for the class of vehicle you drive.

4.1 ­ Vehicle Inspection

Before driving your bus, you must be sure it is safe. You must review the inspection report made by
the last driver. You should only sign the last driver's report whether the defects reported have been
certified as repaired or not needing to be repaired. If the defects have been certified as repaired, this
means they have already been fixed, and your vehicle is safe to drive. If the defects have been
certified as not needing to be repaired, this means there may be some damage or wear on a part of
your vehicle, but it is still safe to drive.

4.1.1 ­ Vehicle Systems

Make sure these things are in good working order before driving:

137                                                               Section 4: Transporting Passengers Safely
    · Coupling devices (if present).
    · Emergency equipment.
    · Horn.
    · Lights and reflectors.
    · Parking brake
    · Rear-vision mirror or mirrors.
    · Service brakes, including air hose couplings (if your bus has a trailer or semitrailer)
    · Steering mechanism.
    · Tires (front wheels must not have recapped or re- grooved tires).
    · Wheels and rims.
    · Windshield wiper or wipers.

Make sure your bus has a fire extinguisher and emergency reflectors (3 reflective triangles or at least
6 fuses or 3 liquid burning flares) required by law. The bus must also have spare electrical fuses,
unless equipped with circuit breakers.

4.1.2 ­ Access Doors and Panels

As you check the outside of the bus, close any open emergency exits. Also, close any open access
panels for baggage, restroom service, engine, or others before driving.

4.1.3 ­ Bus Interior

People sometimes damage unattended buses. Always check the interior of the bus before driving to
ensure rider safety. Aisles and stairwells should always be clear.

The following parts of your bus must be in safe working condition:

    · Each handhold and railing.
    · Floor covering.
    · Signaling devices, including the restroom emergency buzzer, if the bus has a restroom.
    · Emergency exit handles.
    · The seats must be safe for riders. All seats must be securely fastened to the bus.

Never drive with an open emergency exit door or window. The "Emergency Exit" sign on an
emergency door must be clearly visible. If the sign has a red emergency door light, it must work. Turn
it on at night or any other time you use your outside lights.

138  Section 4: Transporting Passengers Safely
4.1.4 ­ Roof Hatches

You may lock some emergency roof hatches in a partly open position for fresh air. Do not leave them
open as regular practice. Keep in mind the bus's higher clearance while driving with them open.

4.1.5 ­ Use Your Seatbelt!

The driver's seat should have a seat belt. Always use it for safety.

4.2­ Loading and Trip Start

Do not allow riders to leave carry-on baggage in a doorway or aisle. There should be nothing in the
aisle that might trip other riders.
Secure baggage and freight in ways that avoid damage and:

    · Allow the driver to move freely and easily.
    · Allow riders to exit by any window or door in an emergency.

         Protect riders from injury if carry-ons fall or shift.

4.2.1 ­ Hazardous Materials

Watch for cargo or baggage carrying hazardous materials. Most hazardous materials cannot be
carried on a bus. They are a risk to health, safety, and property during transportation. Do not
transport any hazardous material unless you are sure the rules allow it.
The Federal Hazardous Materials Table shows which materials are hazardous. The rules require
shippers to mark containers of hazardous material with the material's name, identification number,
and hazard label. There are nine different four-inch, diamond-shaped hazard labels. See Figure 4.1.

139  Section 4: Transporting Passengers Safely
            Figure 4.1: Hazard Class Definitions

     Class  Class Name                            Example
        1   Explosives                            Ammunition, Dynamite, Fireworks
        2   Gases                                 Propane, Oxygen, Helium
        3   Flammable                             Gasoline, Acetone
        4   Flammable Solids                      Matches, Fuses
        5   Oxidizers                             Ammonium, Nitrate, Hydrogen Peroxide
        6   Poisons                               Pesticides, Arsenic
        7   Radioactive                           Uranium, Plutonium
        8   Corrosives                            Hydrochloric Acid, Battery Acid
        9   Miscellaneous Hazardous Materials     Formaldehyde, Asbestos
            ORM-D                                 Hair Spray or Charcoal
     None   (Other Regulated Material- Domestic)
                                                  Fuel Oils, Lighter Fluid
     None   Combustible Liquids

4.2.2 ­ Forbidden Hazardous Materials

Buses may carry small-arms ammunition labeled ORM-D, emergency hospital supplies, and drugs.
You can carry small amounts of some other hazardous materials if the shipper cannot send them any
other way.

Buses must never carry:

    · Division 2.3 poison gas.
    · Liquid Class 6 poison.
    · Tear gas.
    · Irritating material.
    · More than 100 pounds of solid Class 6 poisons.
    · Explosives in the space occupied by people, except small arms ammunition.
    · Labeled radioactive materials in the space occupied by people.
    · More than 500 pounds total of allowed hazardous materials.

140                                               Section 4: Transporting Passengers Safely
    · And no more than 100 pounds of any one class.
Riders sometimes board a bus with unlabeled hazardous material. Do not allow riders to carry on
common hazards such as car batteries or gasoline.

4.2.3 ­ Standee Line

No rider may stand forward of the rear of the driver's seat. Buses designed to allow standing must
have a two-inch line on the floor or some other means of showing riders where they cannot stand.
This is called the standee line. All standing riders must stay behind it.

4.2.4 ­ At Your Destination

When arriving at the destination or intermediate stops announce:
    · The location.
    · Reason for stopping.
    · Next departure time.
    · Bus number.

Remind riders to take their carry-ons with them if they get off the bus. If the aisle is on a lower level
than the seats, remind riders of the step-down. It is best to tell them before coming to a complete
stop.
If you drive a charter bus, you should not let riders on the bus until departure time. This will help
prevent theft or vandalism of the bus.

4.3 ­ On the Road

4.3.1 ­ Passenger Supervision

Many charter and intercity carriers have rules about passenger comfort and safety. Tell passengers
any rules about smoking, vaping, drinking, or using electronic devices at the start of the trip.
Explaining the rules at the start will help to avoid trouble later.
While driving, scan the interior of your bus as well as the road ahead, to the sides, and to the rear.
You may have to remind riders about rules, or to keep their arms and heads inside the bus.

141  Section 4: Transporting Passengers Safely
4.3.2 ­ At Stops

Riders can stumble when getting on or off, and when the bus starts or stops. You should warn riders
to watch their steps when leaving the bus. Wait for them to sit down or brace themselves before
starting. Starting and stopping should be as smooth as possible to avoid rider injury.

Occasionally, you may have a drunk or disruptive rider. You must ensure this rider's safety as well as
that of others. Don't discharge such riders where it would be unsafe for them. It may be safer at the
next scheduled stop or in a well-lit area where there are other people. Many carriers have guidelines
for handling disruptive riders.

4.3.3 ­ Common Crashes

Bus crashes often happen at intersections. Use caution at every intersection, even if it has a signal or
stop sign that controls other traffic.

School and mass transit buses sometimes scrape off mirrors or hit passing vehicles when pulling out
from a bus stop.

Remember the clearance your bus needs and watch for poles and tree limbs at stops.

Know the size of the gap your bus needs to accelerate and merge with traffic. Wait for the gap to
open before leaving the stop. Never assume other drivers will brake to give you room when you
signal or start to pull out.

4.3.4 ­ Speed on Curves

Driving too fast through a curve can cause crashes that destroy buses and kill people. Curves
become even more dangerous when rain or snow has made the road slippery.

Every banked curve has a safe "design speed." The design speed is the speed of vehicles the road
was made to handle. In clear weather, the posted speed is safe for cars, but it may be too high for
many buses. With good traction, the bus may rollover; with poor traction, it might slide off the curve.
Reduce speed for curves! If your bus leans toward the outside on a banked curve, you are driving too
fast.

4.3.5 ­ Railroad-highway Crossing/ Stops

Stop at Railroad Crossings. Stop your bus between 15 and 50 feet before railroad crossings.

Listen and look in both directions for trains. You should open your front door if it makes it easier to
see or hear an approaching train.

Before crossing after a train has passed, make sure there isn't another train coming in the other
direction on other tracks.

If your bus has a manual transmission, never change gears while crossing the tracks.

142  Section 4: Transporting Passengers Safely
You do not have to stop, but must slow down and carefully check for other vehicles:

    · At streetcar crossings.
    · Where a law enforcement officer or flagman is directing traffic.
    · If a traffic signal is green.
    · At crossings marked as "exempt" or "abandoned."

4.3.6 ­ Drawbridges

Stop at Drawbridges. Stop at drawbridges that do not have a signal light or traffic control attendant.
Stop at least 50 feet before the draw of the bridge. Look to make sure the draw is completely closed
before crossing.
You do not need to stop, but must slow down and make sure it's safe, when:

    · There is a traffic light showing green.
    · The bridge has an attendant or traffic officer who controls traffic whenever the bridge opens.

4.4 ­ After-trip Vehicle Inspection

Inspect your bus at the end of each shift. If you work for an interstate carrier, you must complete a
written inspection report for each bus you drive. The report must specify each bus and list any defect
that would affect safety or result in a breakdown. If there are no defects, make sure to say so in the
report.

Riders can sometimes damage safety-related parts such as handholds, seats, emergency exits, and
windows. If you report this damage at the end of a shift, mechanics can make repairs before the bus
goes out again.

Mass transit drivers should also make sure passenger signaling devices and brake-door interlocks
work properly.

4.5 ­ Prohibited Practices

Avoid fueling your bus with riders on board unless necessary. Never refuel in a closed building with
riders on board.
Don't talk with riders or engage in any other distracting activity while driving.

143  Section 4: Transporting Passengers Safely
Do not tow or push a disabled bus with riders aboard the vehicle, unless getting off would be unsafe.
Only tow or push the bus to the nearest safe spot to discharge passengers. Follow your employer's
guidelines on towing or pushing disabled buses.

4.6 ­ Use of Brake-door Interlocks

Mass transit vehicles may have a brake and accelerator interlock system. The interlock applies the
brakes and holds the throttle in idle position when the rear door is open. The interlock releases when
you close the rear door. Do not use this safety feature in place of the parking brake.

Section 4 Test Your Knowledge

    1. Name some things to check in the interior of a bus during a Vehicle Inspection.
    2. What are some hazardous materials you can transport by bus?
    3. What are some hazardous materials you can't transport by bus?
    4. What is a standee line?
    5. Does it matter where you make a disruptive passenger get off the bus?
    6. How far from a railroad crossing should you stop?
    7. When must you stop before crossing a drawbridge?
    8. Describe from memory the "prohibited practices" listed in the manual.
    9. The rear door of a transit bus needs to be open to put on the parking brake. True or False?
These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read Section 4.

144  Section 4: Transporting Passengers Safely
Section 5: Air Brakes

This Section Covers

    1. Air Brake System Parts
    2. Dual Air Brake Systems
    3. Inspecting Air Brakes
    4. Using Air Brakes

This section tells you about air brakes. If you want to drive a truck or bus with air brakes, or pull a
trailer with air brakes, you need to read this section. If you want to pull a trailer with air brakes, you
also need to read Section 6, Combination Vehicles. The airbrake test is a special test on the pre-trip
inspection.

WHAT ARE AIR BRAKES

Air brakes use compressed air to apply pressure to the brake shoes or pads to slow the vehicle down.
Air brakes are a good way of stopping large and heavy vehicles safely, but the brakes must be well
kept and used properly.

Air brakes are really three different braking systems: service brake, parking brake, and emergency
brake.

The service brake system applies and releases the brakes when you use the brake pedal during
normal driving.

The parking brake system applies and releases the parking brakes when you use the parking brake
control.

The emergency brake system uses parts of the service and parking brake systems to stop the vehicle
in case of a brake system failure.

5.1 ­ The Parts of an Air Brake System

There are many parts to an air brake system. You should know about the parts discussed here.

5.1.1 ­ Air Compressor

The air compressor pumps air into the air storage tanks or reservoirs.

145  Section 5: Air Brakes
The air compressor is connected to the engine through gears or a v-belt.

The compressor may be air cooled or may be cooled by the engine cooling system.

It may have its own oil supply or be lubricated by engine oil. If the compressor has its own oil supply,
check the oil level before driving.

5.1.2 ­ Air Compressor Governor

The governor controls when the air compressor will pump air into the air storage tanks.

When air tank pressure rises to the "cut-out" level, the governor stops the compressor from pumping
air. The cut-out level is usually around 125 pounds per square-inch or "psi".

When the tank pressure falls to the "cut-in" level, the governor allows the compressor to start
pumping again. The cut-in level is usually around 100 psi.

5.1.3 ­ Air Storage Tanks

Air storage tanks are used to hold compressed air. The number and size of air tanks varies among
vehicles. The tanks will hold enough air to allow the brakes to be used several times, even if the
compressor stops working.

5.1.4 ­ Air Tank Drains

Compressed air usually has some water and some compressor oil in it, which is bad for the air brake
system. For example, the water can freeze in cold weather and cause brake failure. The water and oil
tend to collect in the bottom of the air tank.

Be sure that you drain the air tanks completely at the end of each day of driving. Each air tank is
equipped with a drain valve in the bottom. There are two types:

    · Manual: Operated by using your hands to turn or by pulling a cable. You must drain the tanks
         yourself at the end of each day of driving. See Figure 5.1.

    · Automatic: The water and oil are automatically drained. These tanks may be equipped for
         manual draining as well.
             o Automatic air tanks are available with electric heating devices. These help prevent
                  freezing of the automatic drain in cold weather.

146  Section 5: Air Brakes
                                                             Figure 5.1

5.1.5 ­ Alcohol Evaporator

Some air brake systems have an alcohol evaporator to put alcohol into the air system. This helps
reduce the risk of ice in air brake valves and other parts during cold weather. Ice inside the system
can make the brakes stop working.
Check the alcohol container and fill it up as needed. In cold weather, you should check every day.
Daily air tank drainage is still needed to get rid of water and oil unless the system has automatic
drain valves.

5.1.6 ­ Safety Valve

A safety relief valve is installed in the first tank the air compressor pumps air to. The safety valve
protects the tank and the rest of the system from too much pressure. The valve is usually set to open
at 150 psi. If the safety valve releases air, something is wrong. Have it fixed by a mechanic.

5.1.7 ­ The Brake Pedal

Pressing down on the brake pedal is what triggers the air brakes. Pressing the pedal down harder
applies more air pressure. Letting up on the brake pedal reduces the air pressure and releases
the brakes.
Releasing the brakes lets some compressed air go out of the system, so the air pressure in the tanks
is reduced. It must be made up by the air compressor.
Pressing and releasing the pedal when you don't need to can let air out faster than the compressor
can replace it. If the pressure gets too low, the brakes won't work.

147  Section 5: Air Brakes
5.1.8 ­ Foundation Brakes

Foundation brakes are used at each wheel. The most common type is the s-cam drum brake. The
parts of the brake are discussed below.

BRAKE DRUMS, SHOES, AND LININGS

There are brake drums on each end of the vehicle's axles. The wheels are bolted to the drums. The
braking mechanism is inside the drum.

The brake works by pushing the brake shoes and linings against the inside of the drum. This causes
friction, which creates heat and slows the vehicle. The heat a drum can take without being damaged
depends on how hard and how long the brakes are used. Too much heat can make the brakes
stop working.

S-CAM BRAKES

When you push the brake pedal, air is let into each brake chamber. Air pressure pushes the rod out,
moving the slack adjuster, thus twisting the brake camshaft. This turns the s-cam (so called because
it is shaped like the letter "S"). The s-cam forces the brake shoes away from one another and presses
them against the inside of the brake drum.

When you release the brake pedal, the s-cam rotates back and a spring pulls the brake shoes away
from the drum, letting the wheels roll freely again. See Figure 5.2.

     Figure 5.2

148              Section 5: Air Brakes
WEDGE BRAKES

In this type of brake, the brake chamber push rod pushes a wedge directly between the ends of two
brake shoes. This shoves them apart and against the inside of the brake drum. Wedge brakes may
have a single brake chamber, or two brake chambers, pushing wedges in at both ends of the brake
shoes. Wedge type brakes may be self-adjusting or may require manual adjustment.

DISC BRAKES

In air-operated disc brakes air pressure acts on a brake chamber and slack adjuster, like s-cam
brakes. But instead of the s-cam, a "power screw" is used. The pressure of the brake chamber on the
slack adjuster turns the power screw. The power screw clamps the disc or rotor between the brake
lining pads of a caliper, like a large c-clamp.

Wedge brakes and disc brakes are less common than s-cam brakes.

5.1.9 ­ Supply Pressure Gauges

All vehicles with air brakes have a pressure gauge connected to the air tank. If the vehicle has a dual
air brake system, there will be a gauge for each half of the system. There are also pressure gauges
with two needles, one for each half of the system. Dual systems will be discussed later. These
gauges tell you how much pressure there is in the air tanks.

5.1.10 ­ Application Pressure Gauge

This gauge shows how much air pressure you are applying to the brakes. This gauge is not on all
vehicles. If you need to apply more pressure to the brakes to hold the same speed, your brakes are
fading. You should slow down and use a lower gear. The need for more pressure can also be caused
by brakes out of adjustment, air leaks, or mechanical problems.

5.1.11 ­ Low Air Pressure Warning

A low air pressure warning signal is needed on vehicles with air brakes. A warning signal you can see
must come on before the air pressure in the tanks falls below 55 psi. On older vehicles, the signal
must come on before one half the compressor governor cutout pressure. The warning is usually a red
light. A buzzer you can hear may also come on.

Another type of warning is the wig wag. This device drops a mechanical arm into your view when the
pressure in the system drops below 55 psi.

    · An automatic wig wag will rise out of your view when the pressure in the system goes above
         55 psi.

    · The manual reset type must be placed in the "out of view" position manually. It will not stay in
         place until the pressure in the system is above 55 psi.

On large buses, the low-pressure warning devices usually signal at 80-85 psi.

149  Section 5: Air Brakes
5.1.12 ­ Stop Light Switch

You need working brake lights to warn drivers behind you when you put your brakes on. The air
brake system turns on an electric switch with air pressure. The switch turns on the brake lights when
you put on the air brakes.

5.1.13 ­ Front Brake Limiting Valve

This section applies only to some vehicles built before 1975. Some of these vehicles have a front
brake limiting valve and a control in the cab. The control is usually marked "normal" and "slippery."
When you put the control in the "slippery" position, the limiting valve cuts the "normal" air pressure to
the front brakes by half.

Limiting valves were used to reduce the chance of the front wheels skidding on slippery surfaces.
However, they reduce the stopping power of the vehicle.

Front wheel braking is good under all conditions. Tests have shown the front wheels are not likely to
skid when braking, even on ice. Make sure the control is in the "normal" position to have normal
stopping power.

Many vehicles have automatic front wheel limiting valves. They reduce the air to the front brakes
except when the brakes are put on very hard (55 psi or more application pressure). The driver cannot
control these valves.

5.1.14 ­ Spring Brakes

All trucks, truck tractors, and buses must be equipped with emergency brakes and parking brakes.
The brakes must be held on by mechanical force because air pressure can eventually leak away.
Spring brakes are usually used to provide this mechanical force.

When driving, powerful springs are held back by air pressure. If the air pressure is removed, the
springs put on the brakes. A parking brake control in the cab allows the driver to let the air out of the
spring brakes. This lets the springs put the brakes on. A leak in the air brake system, which causes all
the air to be lost, will also cause the springs to put on the brakes.

Tractor and straight truck spring brakes will come fully on when air pressure drops to a range of 20 to
45 psi (typically 20 to 30 psi). Do not wait for the brakes to come on automatically. When the low air
pressure warning light and buzzer first come on, bring the vehicle to a safe stop right away, while you
can still control the brakes.

The braking power of spring brakes depends on the brakes being in adjustment. If the brakes are not
adjusted properly, neither the regular brakes nor the emergency/parking brakes will work right.

5.1.15 ­ Parking Brake Controls

In newer vehicles with air brakes, you put on the parking brakes using a diamond-shaped, yellow,
push-pull control knob. You pull the knob out to put the parking brakes (spring brakes) on and push it

150  Section 5: Air Brakes
in to release them. On older vehicles, the parking brakes may be controlled by a lever. Use the
parking brakes whenever you park.

CAUTION: Never push the brake pedal down when the spring brakes are on. If you do, the brakes
could be damaged by the combined forces of the springs and the air pressure. Many brake systems
are designed so this will not happen. But not all systems are set up that way, and those that are may
not always work. It is much better to develop the habit of not pushing the brake pedal down when the
spring brakes are on.

MODULATING CONTROL VALVES

In some vehicles, you can use a control handle on the dashboard to apply the spring brakes
gradually. This is called a modulating valve. It is spring-loaded so you have a feel for the braking
action. The more you move the control lever, the harder the spring brakes come on. They work this
way so you can control the spring brakes if the service brakes fail. When parking a vehicle with a
modulating control valve, move the lever as far as it will go and hold it in place with the locking
device.

DUAL PARKING CONTROL VALVES

When main air pressure is lost, the spring brakes come on. Some vehicles, such as buses, have a
separate air tank which can be used to release the spring brakes. This is so you can move the vehicle
in an emergency.

One of the valves is a push-pull type and is used to put on the spring brakes for parking. The other
valve is spring loaded in the "out" position. When you push the control in, air from the separate air
tank releases the spring brakes so you can move. When you release the button, the spring brakes
come on again.

There is only enough air in the separate tank to do this a few times. You should plan carefully when
moving. Otherwise, you may be stopped in a dangerous location when the separate air supply runs
out. See Figure 5.3.

151  Section 5: Air Brakes
     Figure 5.3

ANTILOCK BRAKING SYSTEMS (ABS)

ABS is a computerized system that keeps your wheels from locking up during hard brake
applications. Truck tractors with air brakes built on or after March 1, 1997, must be equipped with
antilock brakes. Other vehicles with air brakes such as trucks, buses, trailers, and converter dollies
built on or after March 1, 1998, must be equipped with antilock brakes. Many commercial vehicles
built before these dates have been voluntarily equipped with ABS. Check the certification label for the
date of manufacture to find out if your vehicle is equipped with ABS.

Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps to tell you if something isn't working.

Tractors, trucks, and buses will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on the instrument panel.

Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on the left side of the trailer, either on the front or
rear corner.

Dollies must have a lamp on the left side.

152              Section 5: Air Brakes
On newer vehicles, the malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb check and then goes out
quickly. On older systems, the lamp could stay on until you are driving over five mph.

If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes on once you are underway, you may have lost ABS
control at one or more wheels.

It may be hard to tell if an older towed unit is equipped with ABS, especially if it was made before
towed units needed to have ABS. Look under the vehicle for the electronic control unit (ECU) and
wheel speed sensor wires coming from the back of the brakes.

ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does not decrease or increase your normal braking
capability. ABS only activates when wheels are about to lock up.

ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle under
control during hard braking.

     Figure 5.4

153              Section 5: Air Brakes
Subsection 5.1 Test Your Knowledge

    1. Why must air tanks be drained?
    2. What is a supply pressure gauge used for?
    3. All vehicles with air brakes must have a low air pressure warning signal. True or False?
    4. What are spring brakes?
    5. Front wheel brakes are good under all conditions. True or False?
    6. How do you know if your vehicle is equipped with antilock brakes?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsection 5.1.

5.2 ­ Dual Air Brake

Most heavy-duty vehicles use dual air brake systems for safety. A dual air brake system has two
separate air brake systems, which use a single set of brake controls. Each system has its own air
tanks, hoses, lines, etc.

One system typically works the regular brakes on the rear axle or axles. This is called the primary
system. The other system works the regular brakes on the front axle and possibly one rear axle. This
is called the secondary system. Both systems supply air to the trailer. See Figure 5.4.

Before driving a vehicle with a dual air system, allow time for the air compressor to build up a
minimum of 100 psi pressure in both the primary and secondary systems. Watch the primary and
secondary air pressure gauges or needles if the system has two needles in one gauge.

Pay attention to the low air pressure warning light and buzzer. The warning light and buzzer should
shut off when air pressure in both systems rises to a value set by the manufacturer. This value must
be greater than 55 psi.

The warning light and buzzer should come on before the air pressure drops below 55 psi in either
system. If this happens while driving, you should stop right away and safely park the vehicle.

If one air system is very low on pressure, either the front or the rear brakes will not be working fully.
This means it will take you longer to stop. Bring the vehicle to a safe stop and have the air brakes
system fixed.

154  Section 5: Air Brakes
5.3 ­ Inspecting Air Brake Systems

You should use the basic seven-step inspection procedure described in Section 2 to inspect your
vehicle. There are more things to inspect on a vehicle with air brakes than one without them. These
things are discussed below, added where they fit into the seven-step method.

Vehicle Inspection Guide for Vehicles with Air Brakes

STEP 1: REVIEW LAST VEHICLE INSPECTION REPORT
You may have to write a vehicle inspection report each day. The motor carrier must repair any items
in the report that affect safety and certify in the report that repairs were made or unnecessary.
If the report said there were defects, you will need to sign the report.
If no defects were found, you will not need to sign the report.
If you find anything unsafe during the Vehicle Inspection, get it fixed. Federal and state laws forbid
operating an unsafe vehicle.

STEP 2: CHECK ENGINE COMPARTMENT
Check that the parking brakes are on or wheels are chocked.
You may have to raise the hood, tilt the cab (be sure to secure loose things first, so they don't fall and
break something), or open the engine's compartment door.
Check the following:

    · Engine oil level.
    · Coolant level in radiator; condition of hoses.
    · Power steering fluid level; hose condition (if so equipped).
    · Windshield washer fluid level.
    · Battery fluid level, connections and tie downs (battery may be located elsewhere)
    · Automatic transmission fluid level (may require engine to be running).
    · Check each belt for tightness and excessive wear (alternator, water pump, air compressor)

             o NOTE: Learn how much "give" the belts should have when correctly adjusted.
    · Leaks in the engine compartment (fuel, coolant, oil, power steering fluid, hydraulic fluid,

         battery fluid).
    · Cracked, worn electrical wiring insulation.

155  Section 5: Air Brakes
    · Air Compressor Drive Belt: If the air compressor is belt-driven, check the condition and
         tightness of the belt. It should be in good condition.

When you're done checking the engine compartment, lower and secure the hood, cab, or engine
compartment door.

STEP 3: START THE ENGINE AND INSPECT INSIDE THE CAB

Make sure the parking brake is on.

Put the gearshift in neutral (or "park" if automatic).

Start the engine and listen for unusual noises.

If the vehicle has one equipped, check the Anti-lock Braking System (ABS) indicator lights. A light on
the dash should come on and then turn off. If it stays on, the ABS is not working properly. For trailers
only, if the yellow light on the left rear of the trailer stays on, the ABS is not working properly. When
you inspect the inside of the cab, you need to look at the gauges, check the condition of the controls,
check your mirrors and windshield, and check your emergency equipment.

Step 3a: Look at the Gauges
    · Oil pressure ­ It should come up to normal within seconds after the engine is started. See
         Figure 2.5.
    · Air pressure ­ Pressure should build from 50 to 90 psi within 3 minutes. Build air pressure to
         the governor cut-out (usually around 120 ­ 140 psi.) Know your vehicle's requirements.
    · Ammeter or voltmeter ­ Should be in normal range(s).
    · Coolant temperature ­ Should begin a gradual rise to normal operating range.
    · Engine oil temperature ­ Should begin a gradual rise to normal operating range.
    · Warning lights and buzzers ­ Oil, coolant, charging circuit warning, and antilock brake
         system lights should go out right away.

Step 3b: Check the Condition of the Controls.

Check all the following for looseness, sticking, damage, or improper setting:

    · Steering wheel.
    · Clutch.
    · Accelerator ("gas pedal").
    · Brake controls.
    · Foot brake.
    · Trailer brake (if your vehicle has one).
    · Parking brake.
    · Retarder controls (if your vehicle has them).

156  Section 5: Air Brakes
    · Transmission controls.
    · Interaxle differential lock (if your vehicle has one).
    · Horn(s).
    · Windshield wiper/washer.
    · Lights. Headlights. Dimmer switch. Turn signal.
    · Four-way flashers.
    · Light switches for:

             o Parking lamps
             o Clearance lamps
             o Identification lamps

Step 3c: Check Mirrors and Windshield.

Inspect all mirrors and the windshield for cracks, dirt, illegal stickers, or other causes to make seeing
more difficult. Clean and adjust the mirrors and windows if that is needed.

Step 3d: Check Emergency Equipment

Check for the following safety equipment items:

    · Spare electrical fuses (unless the vehicle has circuit breakers).
    · Three red reflective triangles or three liquid burning flares.
    · Properly charged and rated fire extinguisher.

Step 3e) Check the Safety Belt.

Check that the safety belt is securely mounted, is adjustable, latches properly, and is not ripped or
frayed.

STEP 4: TURN OFF THE ENGINE AND CHECK THE VEHICLE'S LIGHTS

Make sure the parking brake is set, turn off the engine, and take the key with you. Turn on headlights
(low beams) and four-way emergency flashers and get out of the vehicle.

STEP 5: DO WALK-AROUND INSPECTION GENERAL INSPECTION OF THE LIGHTS

Go to the front of the vehicle and check that low beams are on and both four-way flashers are
working.

    · Push the dimmer switch and check that the high beams work.
    · Turn off the headlights and the four-way emergency flashers.
    · Turn on parking, clearance, side-marker, and identification lights.

157  Section 5: Air Brakes
    · Turn on the right turn signal and start a walk-around inspection.

Check Slack Adjusters on S-cam Brakes

    · Park on level ground and chock the wheels to prevent the vehicle from moving.
    · Release the parking brakes so you can move the slack adjusters.
    · Use gloves and pull hard on each slack adjuster that you can reach.

If a slack adjuster moves more than about one inch where the push rod attaches to it, you should
have it inspected for proper adjustment. Vehicles with too much brake slack can be very hard to stop.
Out-of-adjustment brakes are the most common problem found in roadside inspections. Be safe.
Check the slack adjusters. Even though automatic slack adjustors adjust themselves during full brake
applications, they must be checked.

Automatic adjusters should not have to be manually adjusted except when performing maintenance
on the brakes and during installation of the slack adjusters. In a vehicle equipped with automatic
adjusters, when the pushrod stroke exceeds the legal brake adjustment limit, it is a sign of a problem
in the adjuster or the related foundation brake components. It could also mean the adjuster was
improperly installed.

When brakes equipped with automatic adjusters are out of adjustment, you should take your vehicle
to a repair facility as soon as possible to have the problem corrected. Just manually bringing the
pushrod strike back into legal limits of an automatic adjuster does not address the problem with the
automatic adjuster. If you do this too often, you risk causing premature wear of the adjuster itself. The
manual adjustment of automatic slack adjusters is dangerous because it may give you a false sense
of security about well your braking system is working.

The manual adjustment of an automatic adjuster should only be used as a temporary measure to
correct the adjustment in an emergency. It's likely the brake will be back out of adjustment since this
usually does not fix the underlying problem.

   NOTE: Automatic slack adjusters are made by different manufacturers and do not all work
   the same. You should consult the specific manufacturer's Service Manual before
   troubleshooting a brake adjustment problem.

Check Brake Drums (or Discs), Linings, and Hoses.

    · Brake drums (or discs) must not have cracks longer than one half the width of the friction area.
    · Linings (friction material) must not be loose or soaked with oil or grease. They must not be

         dangerously thin. Mechanical parts must be in place, not broken or missing.
    · Check the air hoses connected to the brake chambers to make sure they aren't cut or worn

         due to rubbing.

General Inspection of the entire vehicle

Walk around and inspect everything. Review all lights, reflectors, and glass as you go along. Clean
the lights, reflectors, and glass as needed.

158  Section 5: Air Brakes
On the Left Front Side:

    · Driver's door glass should be clean.
    · Door latches and locks should all work properly.
    · Check the condition of the left front wheel and rim:
    · look that it isn't missing, bent, has broken studs, clamps, lugs, or has any signs of

         misalignment.
    · Check the condition of the tires:

             o they should be properly inflated,
             o the valve stem and cap are in good condition,
             o there are no serious cuts,
             o bulges, or
             o tread wear.
    · Review the condition of the lug nuts.
             o Use a wrench to test rust-streaked lug nuts since this could be a sign of looseness.
    · Check the hub oil level is OK and there are no leaks.
    · Check the left front suspension.
    · Check the condition of spring, spring hangers, shackles, u-bolts.
    · Check the shock absorber condition.
    · Check the left front brake.
    · Check the condition of the brake drum or disc.
    · Check the condition of the hoses.

Front

    · Check the condition of the front axle.
    · Check the condition of the steering system.
    · Check that there are no loose, worn, bent, damaged or missing parts.
    · Check the steering mechanism to test for looseness.
    · Check the condition of the windshield for damage and clean if dirty.
    · Check windshield wiper arms for proper spring tension.
    · Check wiper blades for damage, "stiff" rubber, and make sure they are secure.
    · Check the lights and reflectors.
    · Check that parking, clearance, and identification lights are clean, operating, and proper color

         (amber at front).
    · Check that reflectors are clean and have a proper color (amber at front).

159  Section 5: Air Brakes
    · Check that the right front turn signal light is clean, operating, and proper color (amber or white
         on signals facing forward).

On the Right Front Side

    · On the right front you will check all the items as done on the left front.

On the Right Side

    · Primary and secondary safety cab locks engaged (if cab-over-engine design).
    · Check the Right fuel tanks are securely mounted and are not damaged or leaking.
    · Check that the Fuel crossover line is secure.
    · Check that the Tank(s) have enough fuel and cap(s) are on and secure.

Check the Condition of all visible parts.

    · Check that the rear of the engine is not leaking.
    · Check that the transmission is not leaking.
    · Check that the exhaust system is secure, not leaking, not touching wires, fuel, or air-lines.
    · Check that the frame and cross members have no bends or cracks.
    · Check the air-lines and electrical wiring are secured against snagging, rubbing, wearing.
    · Check the spare tire carrier or rack is not damaged (if your vehicle has one).
    · Check the spare tire or wheel is securely mounted in the rack.
    · Check the spare tire and wheel are the right size and have enough air.
    · Check all cargo is properly blocked, braced, balanced, tied, or chained, and is the right weight

         limit for that vehicle to keep it from moving while the vehicle is in motion.
    · If a header board is required, check that it is adequate and secure .
    · Check the side boards, stakes strong enough, free of damage, properly set in place (if so

         equipped).
    · If canvas or tarp is needed, check it is properly secured to prevent tearing, billowing, or

         blocking of mirrors.
    · Check curbside cargo compartment doors are in good condition, securely closed, latched or

         locked and all required security seals in place.
    · If your vehicle is oversize, check that all required signs (flags, lamps, and reflectors) are safely

         and properly mounted and you have all required permits.

Right Rear

    · Check the condition of wheels and rims--no missing, bent, or broken spacers, studs, clamps,
         or lugs.

    · Check the condition of tires--properly inflated, valve stems and caps OK, no serious cuts,
         bulges, tread wear, tires not rubbing each other, and nothing stuck between them.

160  Section 5: Air Brakes
    · Check the tires are of the same type. (not mixed radial and bias types).
    · Check the tires evenly matched (same sizes). Wheel bearing/seals not leaking.
    · Check the suspension.
    · Check the condition of spring(s), spring hangers, shackles, and u-bolts.
    · Check the sale secure.
    · Check the powered axle(s) not leaking lube (gear oil).
    · Check the condition of torque rod arms and bushings.
    · Check the condition of the shock absorber(s).
    · If a retractable axle is equipped, check the condition of the lift mechanism. If it is air powered,

         check for leaks.
    · Check the condition of air ride components.
    · Check the brake adjustment.
    · Check the condition of brake drum(s) or discs.
    · Check the condition of hoses--look for any wear due to rubbing.
    · Check the lights and reflectors.
    · Check the side-marker lights are clean, operating, and proper color (red at rear, others amber).
    · Check the side-marker reflectors clean and proper color (red at rear, others amber).

Rear

    · Check the lights and reflectors.
    · Rear clearance and identification lights should be:

             o clean,
             o operating,
             o and proper color (red at rear).
    · Reflectors should be:
             o clean
             o and proper color (red at rear).
    · Tail lights should be:
             o clean,
             o operating,
             o and proper color (red at rear).
    · Right rear turn signal should be:
             o operating
             o and the proper color (red, yellow, or amber at rear).
    · License plate(s) should be:

161  Section 5: Air Brakes
             o present,
             o clean,
             o and secured.
    · Splash guards should be:
             o Present
             o Not damaged,
             o Properly fastened,
             o Not dragging on ground or rubbing tires.
    · Cargo should be secure.
    · Cargo should be properly blocked, braced, tied, chained, etc.
    · Tailboards should be up and properly secured.
    · End gates should be free of damage, properly secured in stake sockets.
    · Canvas or tarp (if needed) properly secured to prevent tearing, billowing, or blocking of either
         the rearview mirrors or rear lights.
    · If your vehicle is over-length or over-width, make sure all signs and other lights/flags are safely
         and properly mounted and all required permits are in your possession.
    · Rear doors should be securely closed, latched/locked.

Left Side

Check all items as done on right side, plus:

    · Any battery (if not mounted in the engine compartment).
    · Any battery box securely mounted to vehicle. Box has a secure cover.
    · All batteries are secured against movement.
    · Batteries are not broken or leaking.
    · Fluid in batteries is at proper level (except maintenance-free type).
    · Cell caps are present and securely tightened (except maintenance-free type).
    · Vents in cell caps are free of foreign material (except maintenance-free type).

STEP 6: CHECK SIGNAL LIGHTS

Get in your vehicle and turn off all lights.

    · Turn on stop lights (apply trailer hand brake or have a helper put on the brake pedal).
    · Turn on left turn signal lights.
    · Get out and check lights:

             o Left front turn signal light should be:

162  Section 5: Air Brakes
                          clean
                          operating
                          and proper color (amber or white on signals facing the front).
             o Left rear turn signal light should be:
                          clean,
                          operating,
                          and proper color (red, yellow, or amber).
             o Both stop lights should be:
                          clean,
                          operating,
                          and proper color (red, yellow, or amber).

Get back in your vehicle.

    · Turn off lights not needed for driving.
    · Check for all required papers, trip manifests, permits, etc.
    · Secure all loose items in the cab (they might interfere with operation of the controls or hit you

         in a crash).
    · Start the engine.

STEP 7: FINAL AIR BREAK CHECK

Check Air Compressor Governor Cut-in and Cut-out Pressures.

Pumping by the air compressor should start at about 100 psi and stop at about 125 psi. Check
manufacturer's specifications for the exact values.

    · Run the engine at a fast idle.
             o The air governor should cut-out the air compressor at about the manufacturer's
                  specified pressure.
             o The air pressure shown by your gauge(s) will stop rising.

    · With the engine idling, step on and off the brake to reduce the air tank pressure.
             o The compressor should cut-in at about the manufacturer's specified cut-in pressure. The
                  pressure should begin to rise.

If the air governor does not work as described above, it may need to be fixed. A governor that does
not work properly may not keep enough air pressure for safe driving.

163  Section 5: Air Brakes
Test Air Leakage Rate.

With a fully-charged air system (usually around 125 psi), turn off the engine, release the parking
brake (push in); and time the air pressure drop. The loss rate should be less than two psi in one
minute for single vehicles and less than three psi in one minute for combination vehicles.

With the air pressure built up to governor cutoff (120 ­ 140 psi), shut off the engine, chock your
wheels (if necessary), release the parking brake (all vehicles), and the tractor protection valve
(combination vehicle); and fully apply the foot brake. Hold the foot brake for one minute.

Check the air gauge to see if the air pressure drops more than three pounds in one minute (single
vehicle) or four pounds in one minute (combination vehicle). If the air pressure falls more than three
psi in one minute for single vehicles (more than four psi for combination vehicles), the air loss rate is
too much.

Check for air leaks and fix them before driving the vehicle. Otherwise, you could lose your brakes
while driving.

Test Low Pressure Warning Signal.

    1. Shut the engine off when you have enough air pressure so that the low pressure warning
         signal is not on.

    2. Turn the electrical power on and step on and off the brake pedal to reduce air tank pressure.

             · The low air pressure warning signal must come on before the pressure drops to less
                  than 55 psi in the air tank (or tank with the lowest air pressure, in dual air systems). See
                  Figure 5.5.

If the warning signal doesn't work, you could lose air pressure and you would not know it. This could
cause sudden emergency braking in a single-circuit air system. In dual systems the stopping distance
will be increased. Only limited braking can be done before the spring brakes come on.

164  Section 5: Air Brakes
     Figure 5.5

Check That Spring Brakes Come on Automatically.

Continue stepping on and off the brake pedal (called fanning) to reduce tank pressure.

    · The tractor protection valve and parking brake valve should close (pop out) on a tractor-trailer
         combination vehicle, and the parking brake valve should close (pop out) on other combination
         and single vehicle types when the air pressure falls to the manufacturer's specification (20 ­ 45
         psi).

    · This will cause the spring brakes to come on.

Check Rate of Air Pressure Buildup.

When the engine is on, the pressure should build from 85 to 100 psi within 45 seconds in dual air
systems. If the vehicle has larger than minimum air tanks, the buildup time can be longer and still
be safe. Check the manufacturer's specifications. In single air systems (pre-1975), typical
requirements are pressure build-up from 50 to 90 psi within 3 minutes with the engine at an idle
speed of 600-900 rpms.

If air pressure does not build up fast enough, your pressure may drop too low during driving, requiring
an emergency stop. Don't drive until you get the problem fixed.

165              Section 5: Air Brakes
Test Parking Brake.

    · Stop the vehicle.
    · Put the parking brake on
    · and gently pull against it in a low gear to test that the parking brake will hold.

Test Service Brakes.

    · Wait for normal air pressure,
    · Release the parking brake,
    · Move the vehicle forward slowly (about five mph), and
    · Apply the brakes firmly using the brake pedal.
    · Take note of any
    · Vehicle "pulling" to one side
    · unusual feel, or
    · delayed stopping action.
This test may show you problems, which you otherwise wouldn't know about until you needed the
brakes on the road.

Subsections 5.2 and 5.3 Test Your Knowledge

    1. What is a dual air brake system?
    2. What are the slack adjusters?
    3. How can you check slack adjusters?
    4. How can you test the low-pressure warning signal?
    5. How can you check that the spring brakes come on automatically?
    6. What are the maximum leakage rates?
These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsections 5.2 and 5.3.

166  Section 5: Air Brakes
5.4 ­ Using Air Brakes

5.4.1 ­ Normal Stops

Push the brake pedal down. Control the pressure so the vehicle comes to a smooth, safe stop.

If you have a manual transmission, don't push the clutch in until the engine rpm is down close to idle.
When your vehicle stops, select a starting gear.

5.4.2 ­ Braking with Antilock Brakes

When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up. When
your steering wheels lock up, you lose steering control. When your other wheels lock up, you may
skid, jackknife, or even spin the vehicle.

ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up. The computer senses impending lockup, reduces the braking
pressure to a safe level, and helps you maintain control. You may or may not be able to stop faster
with ABS, but you should be able to steer around an obstacle while braking, and avoid skids caused
by over braking.

Only having ABS on the tractor, the trailer, or even one axle, still gives you more control over the
vehicle during braking. Brake normally.

When only the tractor has ABS, you should be able to maintain steering control, and there is less
chance of jackknifing than without ABS on the tractor. But, keep your eye on the trailer and let up on
the brakes (if you can safely do so) if it begins to swing out.

When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control or
start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if you can safely do so) until you gain control.

When you drive a tractor-trailer combination with ABS, you should brake as you always have. In other
words:

    · Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely and stay in control.
    · Brake the same way, regardless of whether you have ABS on the tractor, the trailer, or both.
    · As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so)

         to stay in control.

There is only one exception to this procedure, if you always drive a straight truck or combination with
working ABS on all axles, in an emergency stop, you can fully apply the brakes.

Without ABS, you still have normal brake functions. Drive and brake as you always have.

Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still have regular brakes. Drive normally but get the system
serviced soon.

167                     Section 5: Air Brakes
5.4.3 ­ Emergency Stops

If somebody suddenly pulls out in front of you, your natural response is to hit the brakes. This is a
good response if there's enough distance to stop, and you use the brakes correctly.

You should brake in a way that will keep your vehicle in a straight line and allow you to turn if it
becomes necessary. You can use the "controlled braking" method or the "stab braking" method.

CONTROLLED BRAKING

With this method, you apply the brakes as hard as you can without locking the wheels. Keep steering
wheel movements very small while doing this. If you need to make a larger steering adjustment or if
the wheels lock, release the brakes. Re-apply the brakes as soon as you can.

STAB BRAKING

Apply your brakes all the way. Release brakes when wheels lock up. As soon as the wheels start
rolling, apply the brakes fully again. It can take up to one second for the wheels to start rolling after
you release the brakes. If you re-apply the brakes before the wheels start rolling, the vehicle won't
straighten out.

5.4.4 ­ Stopping Distance

Stopping distance was described in Section 2 under "Speed and Stopping Distance." With air brakes
there is an added delay called brake lag. Brake lag is the time required for the brakes to work after
the brake pedal is pushed. With hydraulic brakes (used on cars and light/medium trucks), the brakes
work instantly. However, with air brakes it takes one half second or more for the air to flow through
the lines to the brakes. The total stopping distance for vehicles with air brake systems is made up of
four factors.

Perception Distance + Reaction Distance + Brake Lag Distance + Braking Distance = Total
Stopping Distance.

The air brake lag distance at 55 mph on dry pavement adds about 32 feet. So, at 55 mph for an
average driver under good traction and brake conditions, the total stopping distance is over 450 feet.
See Figure 5.6.

168  Section 5: Air Brakes
     Figure 5.6

5.4.5 ­ Brake Fading or Failure

Brakes are designed so brake shoes or pads rub against the brake drum or disks to slow the vehicle.
Braking creates heat, but brakes are designed to take a lot of heat. However, brakes can fade or fail
from too much heat caused by using them too often and not relying on the engine braking effect.

If you overuse the service brakes, you can cause overheating which leads to brake fade. Brake fade
happens when excessive heat causes chemical changes in the brake lining, reducing the friction and
causing expansion of the brake drums. As the overheated drums expand, the brake shoes and linings
have to move farther to contact the drums, and the force of this contact is reduced. Continued
overuse may increase brake fade until the vehicle cannot be slowed down or stopped.

Brake fade is also affected by adjustment. To safely control a vehicle, every brake must do its share
of the work. Brakes out of adjustment will stop doing their share before those that are in adjustment.
The other brakes can then overheat and fade, and there will not be enough braking available to
control the vehicle. Brakes can get out of adjustment quickly, especially when they are hot. You
should check brake adjustment often.

169              Section 5: Air Brakes
5.4.6 ­ Proper Braking Technique Downhill

The use of brakes on a long or steep downgrade is only to help the braking effect of the engine. Once
the vehicle is in the proper low gear, the following is the proper braking technique:

    · Apply the brakes just hard enough to feel a definite slowdown.
    · When your speed has slowed to approximately five mph below your "safe" speed, release the

         brakes. (This application should last for about three seconds.)
    · When your speed has increased to your "safe" speed, repeat steps 1 and 2.

For example, if your "safe" speed is 40 mph, you would not apply the brakes until your speed reaches
40 mph. You now apply the brakes hard enough to gradually reduce your speed to 35 mph and then
release the brakes. Repeat this as often as necessary until you have reached the end of the
downgrade.

5.4.7 ­ Low Air Pressure

If the low air pressure warning comes on, stop and safely park your vehicle as soon as possible.
There might be an air leak in the system. Controlled braking is possible only while enough air remains
in the air tanks. The spring brakes will come on when the air pressure drops into the range of 20 to 45
psi.

A heavily loaded vehicle will take a long distance to stop because the spring brakes do not work on all
axles. Lightly loaded vehicles or vehicles on slippery roads may skid out of control when the spring
brakes come on. It is much safer to stop while there is enough air in the tanks to use the foot brakes.

5.4.8 ­ Parking Brakes

Any time you park you should use the parking brakes, except as noted below. Pull the parking brake
control knob out to apply the parking brakes, push it in to release. The control will be a yellow,
diamond-shaped knob labeled "parking brakes" on newer vehicles. On older vehicles, it may be a
round blue knob or some other shape including a lever that swings from side to side or up and down.

Don't use the parking brakes:

    1. if the brakes are very hot (from just having come down a steep grade), or
    2. if the brakes are very wet in freezing temperatures.

If they are used while they are very hot, they can be damaged by the heat. If they are used in freezing
temperatures when the brakes are very wet, they can freeze so the vehicle cannot move.

Use wheel chocks (Figure 5.7) on a level surface to hold the vehicle. Let hot brakes cool before using
the parking brakes. If the brakes are wet, use the brakes lightly while driving in a low gear to heat and
dry them.

170  Section 5: Air Brakes
If your vehicle does not have automatic air tank drains, drain your air tanks at the end of each working
day to remove moisture and oil. Otherwise, the brakes could fail.

Never leave your vehicle unattended without applying the parking brakes or chocking the
wheels. Your vehicle might roll away and cause injury and damage.

     Figure 5.7

Subsection 5.4 Test Your Knowledge

    1. Why should you be in the proper gear before starting down a hill?
    2. What factors can cause brakes to fade or fail?
    3. The use of brakes on a long, steep downgrade is only to help the braking effect of the engine.

         True or False?
    4. If you are only away from your vehicle for a short time, you do not need to use the parking

         brake. True or False?
    5. How often should you drain air tanks?
    6. How should you brake when you drive a tractor-trailer combination with ABS?
    7. You still have normal brake functions if your ABS is not working. True or False?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsection 5.4.

171              Section 5: Air Brakes
Section 6: Combination Vehicles

This Section Covers

    1. Driving Combination Vehicles Safely
    2. Combination Vehicle Air Brakes
    3. Antilock Brake Systems
    4. Coupling and Uncoupling
    5. Inspecting Combinations

This section tells you about combination vehicles like tractor-trailers, doubles, triples, and straight
trucks with trailers. This information is only to give you the minimum knowledge needed for driving
common combination vehicles. You should also study Section 7 if you need to pass the test for
doubles and triples.

6.1 ­ Driving Combination Vehicles Safely

Combination vehicles are usually heavier, longer, and need more driving skill than single commercial
vehicles. This means you need more knowledge and skill to drive combination vehicles than it takes
to drive single vehicles. In this section, we talk about some important safety factors that apply
specifically to combination vehicles.

6.1.1 ­ Rollover Risks

More than half of truck drivers who die in crashes are killed in rollovers. When a truck's cargo is piled
up high, the truck's center of gravity moves higher up from the ground. This makes the truck less
stable and easier to tip over. A fully loaded truck is 10 times more likely to rollover in a crash than an
empty one.

The following two things will help you prevent rollovers:

    · keep the cargo as close to the ground as possible,
    · drive slowly around turns.

Keeping cargo low is even more important in combination vehicles than in straight trucks. Also, keep
the load centered on your rig. If the load is to one side so it makes a trailer lean, a rollover is more
likely. Make sure your cargo is centered and spread out as much as possible. Cargo distribution is
covered in Section 3 of this manual.

Rollovers happen when you turn too fast. Drive slowly around corners, on-ramps, and off-ramps.

172                                        Section 6: Combination Vehicles
Avoid quick lane changes, especially when your truck is fully loaded.

6.1.2 ­ Steer Gently

Trucks with trailers can tip over from a "crack-the- whip" effect. "Crack-the-whip" effect can happen
when you change lanes quickly. The trailer swings out, then swings back, like the end of a whip. That
sharp movement can cause trailer rollover. In many crashes, only the trailer tips over.

The "crack-the-whip" effect happens because of something called "rearward amplification". This
means that when you make a quick lane change, the trailer swings more than the front of the truck.
Figure 6.1 shows eight types of truck and trailer combination vehicles. The chart ranks them from the
least likely to roller over (at the top) to the most likely (at the bottom).

A rearward amplification of 2.0 means the trailer is twice as likely to rollover as the front part of the
truck. Triples (3 trailers) have a rating of 3.5. That means the last trailer is 3.5 times more likely to tip
over than the tractor.

To avoid rollovers:

    · Steer gently and smoothly
    · Don't jerk the wheel - sudden moves can tip your trailer
    · Leave enough space behind other vehicles:

             o Stay back at least 1 second for every 10 feet of your vehicle's length
    · Add 1 more second if you're going over 40mph
    · Look far ahead on the road to avoid surprises or quick lane changes
    · At night, drive slow enough so you can see and react to obstacles in time.
    · Always slow down before turns.

6.1.3 ­ Brake Early

Control your speed whether your truck is loaded or empty. Big trucks take longer to stop when they
are empty. That's because empty trucks have stiff suspension springs and strong brakes, which can
reduce traction. This makes it very easy to lock up the wheels and lose control.

If this happens:

    · Your trailer can swing out and hit other vehicles.
    · Your tractor can jackknife very quickly.

Be extra careful when driving a "bobtail" (a tractor without a semi trailer). Tests show that bobtails are
hard to stop smoothly. They often take longer to stop than a fully loaded tractor-semitrailer.

In any combination rig, allow lots of following distance and look far ahead, so you can brake early.
This helps you avoid sudden emergencies and hazards.

173  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
     Figure 6.1

6.1.4 ­ Railroad-highway Crossings

Railroad-highway crossings can also cause problems, especially if your trailer has low
ground clearance.
These trailers can get stuck on raised crossings:

    · Low slung units (lowboy, car carrier, moving van, possum-belly, livestock trailer).
    · Single-axle tractor pulling a long trailer with its landing gear set to accommodate a tandem-

         axle tractor.
If your vehicle gets stuck on the tracks, get out right away and move away from the tracks.
Look for a sign or signal box at the crossing. It will have emergency contact information.
Call 911 or the number listed. Tell them exactly where you are. Mention any landmarks.

174              Section 6: Combination Vehicles
6.1.5 ­ Prevent Trailer Skids

If the trailer's wheels lock up, the trailer can swing out to the side. This happens more often when the
trailer is empty or lightly loaded. It's called a "trailer jackknife." See Figure 6.2 for an image that
shows a trailer jackknife.

HOW TO STOP A TRAILER SKID:
    1. Recognize the skid. The first and most important step is to watch your mirrors. If you brake
         hard, check your mirrors right away to make sure the trailer is staying behind you. If the trailer
         swings out of your lane, it can jackknife and that is very hard to stop.
    2. Take your foot off the brake. Let go of the brakes so the trailer can get its grip, or traction,
         back. Do not use the trailer hand brake (if you have one) to try to straighten out the rig. This
         can make the skid worse because the trailer brakes likely caused the skid in the first place.
         Once the trailer wheels grip the road again, the trailer will straighten out and follow the tractor.

     Figure 6.2

175              Section 6: Combination Vehicles
6.1.6 ­ Turning Wide and Off-Tracking

When a vehicle goes around a corner, the rear wheels follow a different path than the front wheels.
This is called off-tracking or "cheating." Figure 6.3 shows how off-tracking causes the path followed
by a tractor to be wider than the rig itself.

Longer vehicles will off-track more often. The rear wheels of the truck will off-track some, and the rear
wheels of the trailer will off-track even more. If there is more than one trailer, the rear wheels of the
last trailer will off-track the most.

Steer the front end wide enough around a corner so the rear end does not run over the curb,
pedestrians, or anything else. However, keep the rear of your vehicle close to the curb. This will stop
other drivers from passing you on the right.

If you cannot complete your turn without entering another traffic lane, turn wide as you complete the
turn. This is better than swinging wide to the left before starting the turn because it will keep other
drivers from passing you on the right. See Figure 6.4.

     Figure 6.3

176              Section 6: Combination Vehicles
                                                             Figure 6.4

6.1.7 ­ Backing with a Trailer.

Backing with a Trailer. When backing a car, straight truck, or bus, you turn the top of the steering
wheel in the direction you want to go. When backing a trailer, you turn the steering wheel in the
opposite direction. Once the trailer starts to turn, you must turn the wheel the other way to follow
the trailer.
Whenever you back up with a trailer, try to position your vehicle so you can back in a straight line. If
you must back on a curved path, back to the driver's side so you can see. See Figure 6.5.

177  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
                                                             Figure 6.5

Look at Your Path. Look at your line of travel before you begin. Get out and walk around the vehicle.
Check your clearance to the sides and overhead, in and near the path of your vehicle.
Use Mirrors on Both Sides. Check the outside mirrors on both sides frequently. Get out of the
vehicle and re-inspect your path if you are unsure.
Back Slowly. This will let you make corrections before you get too far off course.
Correct Drift Immediately. As soon as you see the trailer getting off the proper path, correct it by
turning the top of the steering wheel in the direction of the drift.
Pull Forward. When backing a trailer, make pull- ups to reposition your vehicle as needed.

178  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
Subsection 6.1 Test Your Knowledge

    1. What two things are important to prevent rollover?
    2. When you turn suddenly while pulling doubles, which trailer is most likely to turn over?
    3. Why should you not use the trailer hand brake to straighten out a jackknifing trailer?
    4. What is off-tracking?
    5. When you back a trailer, you should position your vehicle so you can back in a curved path to

         the driver's side. True or False?
    6. What type of trailers can get stuck on railroad-highway crossings?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsection 6.1.

6.2 ­ Combination Vehicle Air Brakes

You should study Section 5: Air Brakes before reading this. In combination vehicles the braking
system has parts to control the trailer brakes, in addition to the parts described in Section 5. These
parts are described below.

6.2.1 ­ Trailer Hand Valve

The trailer hand valve (also called the trolley valve or Johnson bar) works the trailer brakes. The
trailer hand valve should be used only to test the trailer brakes. Do not use it in driving because of the
danger of making the trailer skid. The foot brake sends air to every brake on the vehicle, including the
trailer(s). There is much less danger of causing a skid or jackknife when using just the foot brake.

Never use the hand valve for parking because all the air might leak out unlocking the brakes (in
trailers that don't have spring brakes). Always use the parking brakes when parking. If the trailer does
not have spring brakes, use wheel chocks to keep the trailer from moving.

6.2.2 ­ Tractor Protection Valve

The tractor protection valve keeps air in the tractor or truck brake system should the trailer break
away or develop a bad leak. The tractor protection valve is controlled by the "trailer air supply" control
valve in the cab. The control valve allows you to open and shut the tractor protection valve.

The tractor protection valve will close automatically if air pressure is low (in the range of 20 to 45 psi).
When the tractor protection valve closes it stops any air from going out of the tractor. It also lets the
air out of the trailer emergency line. This causes the trailer emergency brakes to come on, with
possible loss of control. For more information about emergency brakes, read Section 6.2.8.

179  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
6.2.3 ­ Trailer Air Supply Control

The trailer air supply control on newer vehicles is a red eight-sided knob, which you use to control the
tractor protection valve. You push it in to supply the trailer with air and pull it out to shut the air off and
put on the trailer emergency brakes. The valve will pop out (thus closing the tractor protection valve)
when the air pressure drops into the range of 20 to 45 psi.

Tractor protection valve controls or "emergency" valves on older vehicles may not work automatically.
There may be a lever rather than a knob. The "normal" position is used for pulling a trailer. The
"emergency" position is used to shut the air off and put on the trailer emergency brakes.

6.2.4 ­ Trailer Air-lines

Every combination vehicle has two air-lines, the service line and the emergency line. They run
between each vehicle (tractor to trailer, trailer to dolly, dolly to second trailer, etc.)

SERVICE AIR-LINE

The service line (also called the control line or signal line) carries air, which is controlled by the foot
brake or the trailer hand brake. Depending on how hard you press the foot brake or hand valve, the
pressure in the service line will similarly change. The service line is connected to relay valves. These
valves allow the trailer brakes to be applied more quickly than would otherwise be possible.

EMERGENCY AIR-LINE

The emergency line (also called the supply line) has two purposes:

    1. It supplies air to the trailer air tanks.
    2. It controls the emergency brakes on combination vehicles.

Loss of air pressure in the emergency line causes the trailer emergency brakes to come on. The
pressure loss could have many different causes like:

    · a trailer breaking loose and tearing apart the emergency air hose
    · a leak in a hose,
    · cracked metal tubing,
    · or some other part breaking or getting loose, letting the air out.

When the emergency line loses pressure, it also causes the tractor protection valve to close (the air
supply knob will pop out).

Emergency lines are often coded with the color red (red hose, red couplers, or other parts) to keep
from getting them mixed up with the blue service line.

180  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
6.2.5 ­ Hose Couplers (Glad Hands)

Glad hands are coupling devices used to connect the service and emergency air-lines from the truck
or tractor to the trailer. The couplers have a rubber seal, which prevents air from escaping. Clean the
couplers and rubber seals before a connection is made. When connecting the glad hands, press the
two seals together with the couplers at a 90 degree angle to each other. Turn the glad hand attached
to the hose to join and lock the couplers.

When coupling, make sure to couple the proper glad hands together. To help avoid mistakes, the
lines are sometimes different colors. Blue is used for the service lines and red for the emergency
(supply) lines. Sometimes, metal tags are attached to the lines with the words "service" and
"emergency" stamped on them. See Figure 6.6

     Figure 6.6

If you do cross the air-lines, supply air will be sent to the service line instead of going to charge the
trailer air tanks. Air will not be available to release the trailer spring brakes (parking brakes). If the
spring brakes don't release when you push the trailer air supply control, check the air-line
connections.

Older trailers do not have spring brakes. If the air supply in the trailer air tank has leaked away there
will be no emergency brakes, and the trailer wheels will turn freely. If you crossed the air-lines, you
could drive away but you wouldn't have trailer brakes. This would be very dangerous. Always test the
trailer brakes before driving with the hand valve or by pulling the air supply (tractor protection valve)
control. Pull gently against them in a low gear to make sure the brakes work.

Some vehicles have "dead end" or dummy couplers to which the hoses may be attached when they
are not in use. This will prevent water and dirt from getting into the coupler and the air-lines. Use the

181              Section 6: Combination Vehicles
dummy couplers when the air-lines are not connected to a trailer. If there are no dummy couplers, the
glad hands can sometimes be locked together (depending on the couplings). It is very important to
keep the air supply clean.

6.2.6 ­ Trailer Air Tanks

Each trailer and converter dolly has one or more air tanks. They are filled by the emergency (supply)
line from the tractor. They provide the air pressure used to operate trailer brakes. Air pressure is sent
from the air tanks to the brakes by relay valves.

The pressure in the service line tells how much pressure the relay valves should send to the trailer
brakes. The pressure in the service line is controlled by the brake pedal (and the trailer hand brake).

It is important that you don't let water and oil build up in the air tanks. If you do, the brakes may not
work correctly. Each tank has a drain valve on it and you should drain each tank every day. If your
tanks have automatic drains, they will keep most moisture out. But you should still open the drains to
make sure.

6.2.7 ­ Shut-off Valves

Shut-off valves (also called cut-out cocks) are used in the service and supply air-lines at the back of
trailers used to tow other trailers. These valves let you close the air-lines off when another trailer is
not being towed. You must check that all shut-off valves are in the open position except the ones at
the back of the last trailer, which must be closed.

6.2.8 ­ Trailer Service, Parking, and Emergency Brakes

Newer trailers have spring brakes just like trucks and truck tractors. However, converter dollies and
trailers built before 1975 do not have to have spring brakes. Those that do not have spring brakes
have emergency brakes, which work from the air stored in the trailer air tank.

For trailers without spring brakes, the emergency brakes come on whenever air pressure in the
emergency line is lost. The emergency brakes come on whenever the air supply knob is pulled out or
the trailer is disconnected. A major leak in the emergency line will cause the tractor protection valve
to close and the trailer emergency brakes to come on. But the brakes will hold only as long as there is
air pressure in the trailer air tank. Eventually, the air will leak away and then there will be no brakes.
These trailers don't have a parking brake, so it is very important you use wheel chocks when you park
trailers without spring brakes.

You may not notice a major leak in the service line until you try to put the brakes on. Then, the air
loss from the leak will lower the air tank pressure quickly. If it goes low enough, the trailer emergency
brakes will come on.

182  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
Subsection 6.2 Test Your Knowledge

    1. Why should you not use the trailer hand valve while driving?
    2. Describe what the trailer air supply control does.
    3. Describe what the service line is for.
    4. What is the emergency air-line for?
    5. Why should you use chocks when parking a trailer without spring brakes?
    6. Where are shut-off valves?
These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsection 6.

6.3 ­ Antilock Brake Systems

6.3.1 ­ Trailers Required to Have ABS

All trailers and converter dollies built on or after March 1, 1998, are required to have ABS. However,
many trailers and converter dollies built before this date have been voluntarily equipped with ABS.
Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on the left side, either on the front or rear corner.
See Figure 6.7. Dollies manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, are required to have a lamp on the
left side.
In the case of vehicles manufactured before the required date, it may be difficult to tell if the unit is
equipped with ABS. Look under the vehicle for the ECU and wheel speed sensor wires coming from
the back of the brakes.

     Figure 6.7

183              Section 6: Combination Vehicles
6.3.2 ­ Braking with ABS

ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does not decrease or increase your normal braking
capability. ABS only activates when wheels are about to lock up.
ABS does not always shorten your stopping distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle under
control during hard braking.
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up. The computer senses impending lockup, reduces the braking
pressure to a safe level, and you maintain control.
Having ABS on only the trailer, or even on only one axle, still gives you more control over the vehicle
during braking.
When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control or
start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if you can safely do so) until you gain control.
When you drive a tractor-trailer combination with ABS, you should brake as you always have.
In other words:
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely and stay in control.
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you have ABS on the tractor, the trailer, or both.
As you slow down, watch your tractor and trailer and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to stay
in control.

   Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still have regular brakes. Drive normally but get
   the system serviced soon.
   ABS won't allow you to drive faster, follow more closely, or drive less carefully.

6.4 ­ Coupling and Uncoupling

Knowing how to couple and uncouple correctly is basic to safe operation of combination vehicles.
Wrong coupling and uncoupling can be very dangerous. General coupling and uncoupling steps are
listed below. There are differences between different rigs, so learn the details of coupling and
uncoupling the truck(s) you will operate.

184  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
6.4.1 ­ How to Couple or Uncouple Tractor-Semitrailers

STEP 1: INSPECT FIFTH WHEEL
    · Check for damaged/missing parts.
    · Check to see that mounting to the tractor is secure, no cracks in the frame, etc.
    · Be sure that the fifth wheel plate is greased as required. If you don't, it could cause steering
         problems because of friction between the tractor and trailer.
    · Check if fifth wheel is in proper position for coupling:
    · Be sure the wheel is tilted down toward the rear of the tractor
    · Check that the jaws open.
    · Check the safety unlocking handle is in the automatic lock position.
    · If you have a sliding fifth wheel, make sure it is locked.
    · Make sure the trailer kingpin is not bent or broken.

STEP 2: INSPECT AREA AND CHOCK WHEELS
    · Make sure the area around the vehicle is clear.
    · Be sure trailer wheels are chocked or spring brakes are on.
    · Check that cargo (if any) is secured against movement due to the tractor being coupled to the
         trailer.

STEP 3: POSITION TRACTOR
    · Put the tractor directly in front of the trailer. (Never back under the trailer at an angle because
         you might push the trailer sideways and break the landing gear.)
    · Check position, using outside mirrors, by looking down both sides of the trailer.

STEP 4: BACK SLOWLY
    · Back until the fifth wheel just touches the trailer. Don't hit the trailer.

STEP 5: SECURE TRACTOR
    · Put on the parking brake.
    · Put the transmission in neutral.

STEP 6: CHECK TRAILER HEIGHT
    · The trailer should be low enough that it is raised slightly by the tractor when the tractor is
         backed under it. Raise or lower the trailer as needed. (If the trailer is too low, the tractor may
         strike and damage the trailer nose; if the trailer is too high, it may not couple correctly.)

185                                                     Section 6: Combination Vehicles
    · Check that the kingpin and fifth wheel are aligned.

STEP 7: CONNECT AIR-LINES TO TRAILER
    · Check glad hand seals and connect tractor emergency air-line to trailer emergency glad hand.
    · Check glad hand seals and connect tractor service air-line to trailer service glad hand.
    · Make sure air-lines are safely supported where they won't be crushed or caught while the
         tractor is backing under the trailer.

STEP 8: SUPPLY AIR TO TRAILER
    · From the cab, push in "air supply" knob or move tractor protection valve control from the
         "emergency" to the "normal" position to supply air to the trailer brake system.
    · Wait until the air pressure is normal. Check brake system for crossed air-lines.
    · Shut the engine off so you can hear the brakes.
    · Apply and release trailer brakes and listen for the sound of trailer brakes being applied and
         released. You should hear the brakes move when applied and hear air escape when the
         brakes are released.
    · Check the air brake system pressure gauge for signs of major air loss.
    · When you are sure trailer brakes are working, start the engine.
    · Make sure air pressure is up to normal.

STEP 9: LOCK TRAILER BRAKES
    · Pull out the "air supply" knob or move the tractor protection valve control from "normal" to
         "emergency."

STEP 10: BACK UNDER TRAILER
    · Use the lowest reverse gear.
    · Back the tractor slowly under the trailer to avoid hitting the kingpin too hard.
    · Stop when the kingpin is locked into the fifth wheel.

STEP 11: CHECK CONNECTION FOR SECURITY
    · Raise trailer landing gear slightly off ground.
    · Pull the tractor gently forward while the trailer brakes are still locked to check that the trailer is
         locked onto the tractor.

STEP 12: SECURE VEHICLE
    · Put the transmission in neutral. Put parking brakes on.

186  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
     · Shut off the engine and take the key with you so someone else won't move the truck while you
         are under it.

STEP 13: INSPECT COUPLING

    · Use a flashlight, if necessary.

    · Make sure there is no space between the upper and lower fifth wheel. If there is space,
         something is wrong (kingpin may be on top of the closed fifth wheel jaws, and the trailer would
         come loose very easily).

    · Go under the trailer and look into the back of the fifth wheel. Make sure the fifth wheel jaws
         have closed around the shank of the kingpin.

    · Check that the locking lever is in the "lock" position.

    · Check that the safety latch is in position over the locking lever. On some fifth wheels the catch
         must be put in place by hand.

    · If the coupling isn't right, don't drive the coupled unit; get it fixed.

STEP 14: CONNECT THE ELECTRICAL CORD AND CHECK AIR-LINES
    · Plug the electrical cord into the trailer and fasten the safety catch.
    · Check both air-lines and electrical lines for signs of damage.
    · Make sure air and electrical lines will not hit any moving parts of vehicle.

STEP 15: RAISE FRONT TRAILER SUPPORTS (LANDING GEAR)

    · Use low gear range (if so equipped) to begin raising the landing gear. Once free of weight,
         switch to the high gear range.

    · Raise the landing gear all the way up. (Never drive with landing gear only part way up as it
         may catch on railroad tracks or other things.)

    · After raising the landing gear, secure the crank handle safely.

    · When full weight of trailer is resting on tractor:

    · Check for enough clearance between the rear of the tractor frame and landing gear.
         When the tractor turns sharply, it must not hit the landing gear.

    · Check that there is enough clearance between the top of the tractor tires and the nose
         of the trailer.

STEP 16: REMOVE TRAILER WHEEL CHOCKS
    · Remove and store wheel chocks in a safe place.

6.4.2 ­ Uncoupling Tractor-Semitrailers

The following steps will help you to uncouple safely.

187                                                    Section 6: Combination Vehicles
STEP 1: POSITION RIG
    · Make sure the surface of the parking area can support the weight of the trailer.
    · Have the tractor lined up with the trailer. Pulling out at an angle can damage landing gear.

STEP 2: EASE PRESSURE ON LOCKING JAWS
    · Shut off trailer air supply to lock trailer brakes.
    · Ease pressure on fifth wheel locking jaws by backing up gently. (This will help you release the
         fifth wheel locking lever.)
    · Put parking brakes on while the tractor is pushing against the kingpin. (This will hold the rig
         with pressure off the locking jaws.)

STEP 3: CHOCK TRAILER WHEELS
    · Chock the trailer wheels if the trailer doesn't have spring brakes or if you're not sure. (The air
         could leak out of the trailer air tank, releasing its emergency brakes. Without chocks, the trailer
         could move.)

STEP 4: LOWER THE LANDING GEAR
    · If the trailer is empty, lower the landing gear until it makes firm contact with the ground.
    · If the trailer is loaded, after the landing gear makes firm contact with the ground, turn crank in
         low gear a few extra turns. This will lift some weight off the tractor. Do not lift the trailer off the
         fifth wheel. This will:
             o Make it easier to unlatch the fifth wheel.
             o Make it easier to couple the next time.

STEP 5: DISCONNECT AIR-LINES AND ELECTRICAL CABLE
    · Disconnect air-lines from the trailer. Connect air-line glad hands to dummy couplers at the
         back of the cab or couple them together.
    · Hang electrical cable with plug down to prevent moisture from entering it.
    · Make sure lines are supported so they won't be damaged while driving the tractor.

STEP 6: UNLOCK FIFTH WHEEL
    · Raise the release handle lock.
    · Pull the release handle to the "open" position.
    · Keep legs and feet clear of the rear tractor wheels to avoid serious injury in case the vehicle
         moves.

188  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
STEP 7: PULL TRACTOR PARTIALLY CLEAR OF TRAILER
    · Pull the tractor forward until the fifth wheel comes out from under the trailer.
    · Stop with the tractor frame under the trailer (prevents the trailer from falling to ground if landing
         gear should collapse or sink).

STEP 8: SECURE TRACTOR
    · Apply the parking brake.
    · Place transmission in neutral.

STEP 9: INSPECT TRAILER SUPPORTS
    · Make sure the ground is supporting the trailer. Make sure the landing gear is not damaged.

STEP 10: PULL TRACTOR CLEAR OF TRAILER
    · Release parking brakes.
    · Check the area and drive the tractor forward until it clears.

Subsections 6.3 and 6.4 Test Your Knowledge

    1. What might happen if the trailer is too high when you try to couple?
    2. After coupling, how much space should be between the upper and lower fifth wheel?
    3. You should check the back of the fifth wheel to see if it is locked onto the kingpin.

         True or False?
    4. To drive you need to raise the landing gear only until it just lifts off the pavement. True or

         False?
    5. How do you know if your trailer is equipped with antilock brakes?
These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsections 6.3 and 6.4.

6.4.3 ­ Coupling a Pintle Hook

STEP 1: INSPECT PINTLE HOOK
    · Before operating, check for worn, damaged, or missing parts, and make sure the mount is
         secure. If the pintle hook is not secured to the mounting surface, the pintle hook could
         separate from the vehicle which, if not avoided, could result in death or serious injury.

189  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
STEP 2: UNLOCK LOCK PIN AND OPEN LATCH
    · Unlock and remove the tethered lock pin, if applicable (Figure 6.8).

                                                             Figure 6.8
    · Lift the lock handle away from the vehicle until the lock clears the lock seat on the hook body.
    · Open the latch by rotating the latch assembly up toward the vehicle until the latch is in its most

         upright position, then release the lock handle. (Figures 6.9 and 6.10)

                                                             Figure 6.9

     Figure 6.10

STEP 3: LOWER DRAWBAR INTO PLACE
    · Position the drawbar eye over the horn of the pintle hook and lower it into place.

190               Section 6: Combination Vehicles
STEP 4: LOCK PINTLE HOOK

    · Push the latch closed. When locked correctly, the lock handle will rotate and move up until it is
         flush with the top of the latch (Figure 6.11).

                                                            Figure 6.11

    · Insert the tethered lock pin through the latch and lock holes, and close the tethered wire lock
         pin. (Figure 6.8).

    · Not locking the latch correctly can cause the trailer to separate from the vehicle. A trailer
         separation could cause death or serious injury if the trailer were to hit someone.

6.4.4 ­ Uncoupling a Pintle Hook

STEP 1: PARK ON LEVEL SURFACE
    · Park the trailer on a firm level surface and block trailer tires.

STEP 2: DISCONNECT ELECTRICAL CONNECTOR, BREAKAWAY BRAKE SWITCH AND
SAFETY CHAINS

    · Disconnect electrical connector.
    · Disconnect breakaway brake switch lanyard. Disconnect safety chains from tow vehicle.

STEP 3: UNLOCK THE COUPLER
    · Unlock the coupler and open it.

STEP 4: CHECK GROUND SURFACE FOR CORRECT SUPPORT
    · Before extending the jack, make sure the ground surface below the jack pad will support the
         tongue load.

191  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
STEP 5: ROTATE JACK HANDLE
    · Rotate jack handle to extend the jack and transfer the weight of the trailer tongue to the jack.

STEP 6: RAISE TRAILER COUPLER
    · Raise the trailer coupler above the tow vehicle hitch.

STEP 7: DRIVE FORWARD
    · Drive the tow vehicle forward.

6.4.5 ­ Coupling a Drawbar

USE FIGURE 6.12 TO FOLLOW THE STEPS 1-4:

     Figure 6.12

Step 1: Remove Safety Lock screw and Rotate Safety Cover Bar

    · Remove safety lock screw (2 in Figure 6.12), recover and keep its self-locking nut (12 in
         Figure 6.12) aside then also loosen safety lock screw (2a in Figure 6.12) and turn out the
         adjustment screw (3 in Figure 6.12) by at least five turns.

    · Rotate the safety cover bar (4 in Figure 6.12) outwards so that it is completely open.

Step 2: Reverse Truck

    · Reverse truck very slowly until the ball cup drawbar eye (6 in Figure 6.12) is in position
         exactly above the drawbar coupling ball (5 in Figure 6.12).

Step 3: Lower the Drawbeam

    · Lower the drawbeam until the ball cup drawbar eye (6 in Figure 6.12) lies completely
         covering the drawbar coupling ball (5 in Figure 6.12).

192               Section 6: Combination Vehicles
Step 4: Rotate the Safety Cover Bar
    · Rotate the safety cover bar (4 in Figure 6.12) back inwards and fit in safety lock screw (2 in
         Figure 6.12) together with its self-locking nut (12 in Figure 6.12).
    · Tighten in both the lock screws (2,2a in Figure 6.12) together with their self-locking nuts
         (12, 12a in Figure 6.12) at a 350 to 400 Nm torque wrench setting.

USE FIGURE 6.13 TO FOLLOW STEP 5:

                                                            Figure 6.13

Step 5: Adjust the Adjustment Screw
    · Adjust the adjustment screw (3 in Figure 6.13) until there is a 0.3 - 0.5 mm vertical clearance
         between the guard disk (13 in Figure 6.13) and the ball cup (6 in Figure 6.13). Lock setting
         with counter nut (11 in Figure 6.13).

193  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
USE FIGURE 6.14 TO FOLLOW STEPS 6-7:

     Figure 6.14

The safety cover bar (4 in Figure 6.12) must perfectly lodge into its seating appropriately or you are
not allowed to drive the combination vehicle.

Step 6: Protect Coupling Ball and Anchor Edge onto Ball
    · Protect the part that is still visible of the coupling ball (5 in Figure 6.14) with the rubber dust
         proof bellows protection cover (7 in Figure 6.14). Accurately anchor the edge directly onto
         the ball itself.

Step 7: Lubricate the Drawbar Eye
    · Lubricate the inside of the drawbar eye ball cup (6 in Figure 6.14) directly through the
         grease nipple (18 in Figure 6.14).

6.4.6 ­ Uncoupling a Drawbar

STEP 1: TURN TRAILER BRAKE ON
    · Make sure that the trailer brake is on.

STEP 2: REMOVE COVER AND LOOSEN SCREWS
    · Remove the rubber dust proof bellows protection cover (7 in Figure 6.13).
    · Loosen the adjustment screw (3 in Figure 6.13) and the counter nut (11 in Figure 6.13).
    · Loosen safety lock screw (2a in Figure 6.12) and remove safety lock screw (2 in Figure
         6.12) together with its self-locking nut (12 in Figure 6.12).

194                                   Section 6: Combination Vehicles
STEP 3: ROTATE SAFETY COVER BAR AND LIFT TRAILER DRAWBEAM
    · Rotate the safety cover bar (4 in Figure 6.12) outwards so that it is completely open.
    · Lift the trailer drawbeam until the drawbar coupling ball (5 in Figure 6.12) is fully visible.
         Move forward with the trailer very slowly.
    · Rotate the safety cover bar (4 in Figure 6.12) inwards until it lodges back in its housing.

STEP 4: LOCK SAFETY SCREW AND TIGHTEN SELF- LOCKING NUT
    · Fit in safety lock screw (2 in Figure 6.12) and tighten in self-locking nut (12 in Figure 6.12).

6.4.7 ­ Coupling a Gooseneck Hitch

If you are hooking up a Gooseneck or a fifth wheel hitch, the procedure is a little different from a
receiver and ball, but it is not more difficult.

STEP 1: OPEN THE LATCH AND LUBRICATE THE GOOSENECK BALL
    · Open the clamp latch on the Gooseneck coupler. Make sure that the Gooseneck ball is
         properly lubricated.

STEP 2: POSITION COUPLER AND LATCH THE CLAMP
    · Position the trailer's coupler directly over the ball and lower the Gooseneck trailer into position
         and latch the clamp.

STEP 3: ATTACH SAFETY CHAINS
    · Attach your safety chains. Remember that all gooseneck trailers are required by law to have
         safety chains.

STEP 4: CONNECT TRAILER LIGHT WIRING
    · Connect your trailer light wiring to your vehicle's connector.
    · Check all your lights, including your brake lights.

STEP 5: LOWER AND STOW THE TRAILER JACKS
    · Completely lower and stow the trailer jacks, allowing the weight to settle onto the tow vehicle.

6.4.8 ­ Uncoupling a Gooseneck Hitch

STEP 1: REMOVE SAFETY PIN AND CLIP            Section 6: Combination Vehicles
    · Simply remove the safety pin and clip.

195
STEP 2: ROTATE HANDLE AND RAISE TRAILER OFF BALL
    · Rotate handle to the position shown in Figure 6.15 and raise trailer off ball. Coupler will return
         to load position automatically.

STEP 3: INSTALL SAFETY PIN AND CLIP
    · Install safety pin and clip. See Figure 6.15.

     Figure 6.15

6.5 ­ Inspecting a Combination Vehicle

Use the seven-step inspection procedure described in Section 2 to inspect your combination
vehicle. There are more things to inspect on a combination vehicle than on a single vehicle. For
example, tires, wheels, lights, reflectors, etc. However, there are also new things to check. These are
discussed below.

6.5.1 ­ Additional Things to Check during a Walk-around Inspection

Do these checks in addition to those already listed in Section 2.

COUPLING SYSTEM AREAS
Check the fifth wheel (lower part):

    · Securely mounted to frame.
    · No missing or damaged parts.

196                                     Section 6: Combination Vehicles
     · Has enough grease.
     · No visible space between upper and lower fifth wheel.
     · Locking jaws are around the shank and not the head of kingpin. See Figure 6.16.
     · Release arm is properly seated and safety latch/lock engaged.

                                                            Figure 6.16

     · Check the fifth wheel (upper part).
     · Glide plate is securely mounted to the trailer frame. Kingpin is not damaged.
     · Air and electric lines to the trailer.
     · Electrical cord is firmly plugged in and secured.
     · Air-lines are properly connected to glad hands with no air leaks.
     · Aire-lines are properly secured with enough slack for turns.
     · All lines are free from damage.
     · Check Sliding fifth wheel if there is one.
     · Slide is not damaged or parts missing.
     · Slide is properly greased.
     · All locking pins are present and locked in place.
     · If air powered check there are no air leaks.
     · Check that the fifth wheel is not so far forward that the tractor frame will hit the landing gear or

         the cab hit the trailer, during turns.

197  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
LANDING GEAR
    · Fully raised.
    · Parts are not missing, bent or otherwise damaged.
    · Crank handle in place and secured.
    · If power operated, no air or hydraulic leaks.

6.5.2 ­ Combination Vehicle Brake Check

Do these checks in addition to those listed in Section 5.3: Inspecting Air Brake Systems.

The following section explains how to check air brakes on combination vehicles. Check the brakes on
a double or triple trailer as you would any combination vehicle.

CHECK THAT AIR FLOWS TO ALL TRAILERS
    · Use the tractor parking brake or chock the wheels to hold the vehicle.
    · Wait for air pressure to reach normal, then push in the red "trailer air supply" knob. This will
         supply air to the emergency (supply) lines.
    · Use the trailer handbrake to provide air to the service line.
    · Go to the rear of the rig.
    · Open the emergency line shut-off valve at the rear of the last trailer. You should hear air
         escaping, showing the entire system is charged.
    · Close the emergency line valve.
    · With the trailer handbrake or service brake pedal on, open the service line valve to check that
         service pressure goes through all the trailers and then close the valve. If you do NOT hear air
         escaping from both lines, check that the shut-off valves on the trailer and dolly are in the
         OPEN position. You MUST have air all the way to the back for all the brakes to work.

TEST TRACTOR PROTECTION VALVE
    · Charge the trailer air brake system by building up normal air pressure and pushing the "air
         supply" knob in.
    · Shut the engine off.
    · Step on and off the brake pedal several times to reduce the air pressure in the tanks. The
         trailer air supply control (also called the tractor protection valve control) should pop out (or go
         from "normal" to "emergency" position) when the air pressure falls into the pressure range
         specified by the manufacturer. Usually within the range of 20 to 45 psi.

If the tractor protection valve doesn't work properly, an air hose or trailer brake leak could drain all the
air from the tractor. This would cause the emergency brakes to come on, with possible loss of control.

198  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
TEST TRAILER EMERGENCY BRAKES
    · Charge the trailer air brake system and check that the trailer rolls freely.
    · Then stop and pull out the trailer air supply control (also called tractor protection valve control
         or trailer emergency valve) or place it in the "emergency" position.
    · Pull gently on the trailer with the tractor to check that the trailer emergency brakes are on.

TEST TRAILER SERVICE BRAKES
    · Check for normal air pressure,
    · Release the parking brakes,
    · Move the vehicle forward slowly and apply trailer brakes with the hand control (trolley valve), if
         so equipped.
             o You should feel the brakes come on. This tells you the trailer brakes are connected and
                  working. The trailer brakes should be tested with the hand valve, but controlled in
                  normal operation with the foot pedal, which applies air to the service brakes at all
                  wheels.

Subsection 6.5 Test Your Knowledge

    1. Which shut-off valves should be open and which closed?
    2. How can you test that air flows to all trailers?
    3. How can you test the tractor protection valve?
    4. How can you test the trailer emergency brakes?
    5. How can you test the trailer service brakes?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer all of them, re-read subsection 6.5.

199  Section 6: Combination Vehicles
Section 7: Doubles and Triples

This Section Covers
    1. Pulling Double/Triple Trailers
    2. Coupling and Uncoupling
    3. Inspecting Doubles and Triples
    4. Checking Air Brakes

This section tells you about driving safely with double and triple trailers. It tells you about how
important it is to be very careful when driving with more than one trailer, how to couple and uncouple
correctly, and about inspecting doubles and triples carefully. If you want to get your CDL with a
Double/Triple endorsement, you should also study Sections 2, 5, and 6.

   NOTE: Triples are not allowed under Maryland Law, but you can still get the endorsement T
   with a knowledge test.

7.1 ­ Pulling Double/Triple Trailers

You need to take special care when pulling two and three trailers. The extra trailers make your
vehicle less stable and more likely to rollover. Pay special attention to the situations covered in the
next sections.

7.1.1 ­ Prevent Your Trailer from Rolling Over

To prevent trailers from rolling over, you must steer gently and go slowly around corners, on ramps,
off ramps, and curves. A safe speed on a curve for a straight truck or a single trailer combination
vehicle may be too fast for a set of doubles or triples.

7.1.2 ­ Beware of the Crack-the-Whip Effect

Doubles and triples are more likely to turn over than other combination vehicles because of the
"crack- the-whip" effect. You must steer gently when pulling trailers. The last trailer in a combination
is the trailer most likely to turn over. If you don't understand the crack- the-whip effect, study
subsection 6.1.2 of this manual.

200  Section 7: Doubles and Triples
7.1.3 ­ Inspect Completely

There are more critical parts to check when you have two or three trailers. You need to check them
all. Follow the steps described later in this section.

7.1.4 ­ Look Far Ahead

Doubles and triples must be driven very smoothly to avoid rollover or jackknife. Look further ahead
than you would while driving a single vehicle so you can slow down and change lanes safely.

7.1.5 ­ Manage Space

Doubles and triples take up more space than other commercial vehicles. They are longer and need
more space because they can't be turned or stopped suddenly. You should allow more following
distance. Make sure you have large enough gaps before entering or crossing traffic. Be certain you
are clear at the sides before changing lanes.

7.1.6 ­ Bad Conditions

Be more careful in bad conditions. In bad weather, slippery conditions, and mountain driving, you
must be especially careful if you drive doubles and triples. You will have more length and more dead
axles to pull with your drive axles than other drivers. There is more chance for skids and loss of
traction.

7.1.7 ­ Parking the Vehicle

When parking a vehicle pulling more than one trailer, you need to choose a spot you can pull straight
through. Trying to back up out of a parking spot will take a lot of time and be very difficult. You need
to be aware of how parking lots are arranged to avoid a long and difficult escape.

7.1.8 ­ Antilock Braking Systems on Converter Dollies

Converter dollies built on or after March 1, 1998, must have antilock brakes. These dollies will have a
yellow lamp on the left side of the dolly.

201  Section 7: Doubles and Triples
7.2 ­ Coupling and Uncoupling

Knowing how to couple and uncouple correctly is basic to safe operation of doubles and triples.
Wrong coupling and uncoupling can be very dangerous. Coupling and uncoupling steps for doubles
and triples are listed below.

7.2.1 ­ Coupling Twin Trailers

SECURE SECOND (REAR) TRAILER

If the second trailer doesn't have spring brakes, drive the tractor close to the trailer, connect the
emergency line, charge the trailer air tank, and disconnect the emergency line. This will set the trailer
emergency brakes if the slack adjusters are correctly adjusted. Chock the wheels if you have any
doubt about the brakes.

For the safest handling on the road, the more heavily loaded semi-trailer should be in first position
behind the tractor. The lighter trailer should be in the rear.

A converter gear on a dolly is a coupling device of one or two axles and a fifth wheel by which a semi-
trailer can be coupled to the rear of a tractor- trailer combination forming a double bottom rig. See
Figure 7.1.

     Figure 7.1

POSITION CONVERTER DOLLY IN FRONT OF SECOND (REAR) TRAILER

Release dolly brakes by opening the air tank valve. Or, if the dolly has spring brakes, use the dolly
parking brake control.

If you have enough distance, wheel the dolly into position by hand so it is in line with the kingpin.

202              Section 7: Doubles and Triples
Or you can use the tractor and first semitrailer to pick up the converter dolly. Follow these steps:

    1. Position the combination as close as possible to the converter dolly.
    2. Move the dolly to the rear of the first semitrailer and couple it to the trailer.
    3. Lock pintle hook.
    4. Secure dolly support in raised position.
    5. Pull the dolly into position as close as possible to the nose of the second semitrailer.
    6. Lower dolly support.
    7. Unhook dolly from the first trailer.
    8. Wheel dolly into position in front of the second trailer in line with the kingpin.

CONNECT CONVERTER DOLLY TO FRONT TRAILER
    1. Back the first semi-trailer into position in front of the dolly tongue.
    2. Hook the dolly to the front trailer. Lock the pintle hook.
    3. Secure converter gear support in raised position.

CONNECT CONVERTER DOLLY TO REAR TRAILER
    1. Make sure trailer brakes are locked or wheels are chocked.
    2. Make sure trailer height is correct.
             · It must be slightly lower than the center of the fifth wheel, so the trailer is raised slightly
                  when the dolly is pushed under.
    3. Back converter dolly under rear trailer.
    4. Raise landing gear slightly off ground to prevent damage if the trailer moves.
    5. Test coupling by pulling against the pin of the second semitrailer.
    6. Make a visual check of coupling.
             · There should not be space between the upper and lower fifth wheel.
             · The locking jaws should be closed on the kingpin.
    7. Connect safety chains, air hoses, and light cords.
    8. Close converter dolly air tank valve, and service and emergency shut-off valves at rear of
         second trailer.
    9. Open shut-off valves at rear of first trailer and on dolly if it is present.
    10. Raise landing gear completely.
    11. Charge trailer brakes by pushing the "air supply" knob in and check for air at the rear of the
         second trailer by opening the emergency line shut-off. If air pressure isn't there, something is
         wrong and the brakes won't work.

203  Section 7: Doubles and Triples
7.2.2 ­ Uncoupling Twin Trailers

UNCOUPLE REAR TRAILER
    1. Park your rig in a straight line on firm level ground. Apply parking brakes so the rig won't move.
    2. Chock wheels of the second trailer if it doesn't have spring brakes.
    3. Lower the landing gear of the second semi-trailer enough to remove some weight from the
         dolly.
    4. Close air shut-offs at rear of first semi-trailer and on dolly if it is equipped with one.
    5. Disconnect all dolly air and electric lines and secure them.
    6. Release dolly brakes.
    7. Release converter dolly fifth wheel latch.
    8. Slowly pull the tractor, first semi trailer, and dolly forward to pull the dolly out from under the
         rear semi trailer.

UNCOUPLE CONVERTER DOLLY
    1. Lower dolly landing gear. Disconnect safety chains.
    2. Apply converter gear spring brakes or chock wheels.
    3. Release pintle hook on first semi-trailer. Slowly pull clear of the dolly.
             · Never unlock the pintle hook with the dolly still under the rear trailer. The dolly tow bar
                  may fly up, possibly causing injury, and making it very difficult to re-couple.

7.2.3 ­ Coupling and Uncoupling Triple Trailers

COUPLE TRACTOR/FIRST SEMI TRAILER TO SECOND/THIRD TRAILERS
    1. Couple tractor to first trailer. Use the method already described for coupling tractor-semi
         trailers.
    2. Move converter dolly into position and couple first trailer to second trailer using the method for
         coupling doubles. Triples rig is now complete.

UNCOUPLE TRIPLE-TRAILER RIG
    1. Uncouple third trailer by pulling the dolly out, then unhitching the dolly using the method for
         uncoupling doubles.
    2. Uncouple remainder of rig as you would any double-bottom rig using the method already
         described.

204  Section 7: Doubles and Triples
7.2.4 ­ Coupling and Uncoupling Other Combinations

The methods described so far apply to the more common tractor-trailer combinations. However, there
are other ways of coupling and uncoupling the many types of truck-trailer and tractor-trailer
combinations that are in use. There are too many to cover in this manual. You will need to learn the
correct way to couple and uncouple the vehicle(s) you will drive according to their manufacturer and
owner specifications.

7.3 ­ Inspecting Doubles and Triples

Use the seven-step inspection procedure described in Section 2 to inspect your combination vehicle.

There are more things to inspect on a combination vehicle than on a single vehicle. Many of these
items are simply more of what you would find on a single vehicle. For example, tires, wheels, lights,
and reflectors. There are also some new things to check. These are discussed below.

7.3.1 ­ Additional Checks

Do these checks in addition to those already listed in Section 2.1.5, Step 5: Do a Walk-around
Inspection.

COUPLING SYSTEM AREAS
    · Check fifth wheel (lower): make sure
             o It is securely mounted to frame;
             o There are no missing or damaged parts; and
             o There is enough grease.
    · Check the fifth wheel (upper).
    · Check the glide plate is securely mounted to the trailer frame.
    · Check the kingpin is not damaged.
    · Check there is no visible space between the upper and lower fifth wheel.
    · Check the locking jaws are around the shank, not the head of the kingpin.
    · Check the release arm is properly seated and the safety latch/lock engaged.
    · Check the air and electric lines to the trailer.
    · Check the electrical cord is firmly plugged in and secured.
    · Check the air-lines are:
    · properly connected to glad hands,

205  Section 7: Doubles and Triples
    · have no air leaks, and
    · are properly secured with enough slack for turns.
    · Check that all lines are free from damage.
    · Check the sliding fifth wheel: that
    · The slide is not damaged;
    · The slide is not missing parts; and
    · It is properly greased.
    · Check that all locking pins are present and locked in place.
    · If air powered, check there are no air leaks.
    · Check the fifth wheel is not so far forward that the tractor frame will hit landing gear, or the cab

         will hit the trailer, during turns.

LANDING GEAR
    · Check it is fully raised.
    · Check that no parts are missing.
    · Check that it is not bent or damaged.
    · Check the crank handle is in place and secured.
    · If power operated, check there are no air or hydraulic leaks.

DOUBLE AND TRIPLE TRAILERS
    · Check the shut-off valves at the rear of trailers, in service and emergency lines.
    · Check the rear of front trailers: OPEN.
    · Check the rear of the last trailer: CLOSED.
    · Check the converter dolly air tank drain valve: CLOSED.
    · Be sure air-lines are supported and glad hands are properly connected.
    · If the spare tire is carried on converter gear (dolly), make sure it's secured.
    · Be sure the pintle-eye of the dolly is in place in the pintle hook of trailer(s).
    · Make sure the pintle hook is latched.
    · Check that safety chains are secured to trailer(s).
    · Be sure light cords are firmly in sockets on trailers.

7.3.2 ­ Additional Things to Check during a Walk-around Inspection

Remember that the checks in this section are in addition to Subsection 5.3, Inspecting Air
Brake Systems.

206  Section 7: Doubles and Triples
7.4 ­ Doubles/Triples Air Brake Check

Check the brakes on a double or triple trailer as you would any combination vehicle. Subsection 6.5.2
explains how to check air brakes on combination vehicles. You must also make the following checks
on your double or triple trailers

7.4.1 ­ Additional Air Brake Checks

CHECK THAT AIR FLOWS TO ALL TRAILERS (DOUBLE AND TRIPLE TRAILERS).
    · Use the tractor parking brake or chock the wheels to hold the vehicle.
    · Wait for air pressure to reach normal, then push in the red "trailer air supply" knob. This will
         supply air to the emergency (supply) lines.
    · Use the trailer handbrake to provide air to the service line.
    · Go to the rear of the rig.
    · Open the emergency line shut-off valve at the rear of the last trailer. You should hear air
         escaping, showing the entire system is charged.
    · Close the emergency line valve.
    · Open the service line valve to check that service pressure goes through all the trailers (this test
         assumes that the trailer handbrake or the service brake pedal is on), and then close the valve.
             o If you do NOT hear air escaping from both lines, check that the shut-off valves on the
                  trailer(s) and dolly(ies) are in the OPEN position. You MUST have air all the way to the
                  back for all the brakes to work.

TEST TRACTOR PROTECTION VALVE.
    · Charge the trailer air brake system by building up normal air pressure and pushing the "air
         supply" knob in.
    · Shut the engine off.
    · Step on and off the brake pedal several times to reduce the air pressure in the tanks. The
         trailer air supply control (also called the tractor protection valve control) should pop out (or go
         from "normal" to "emergency" position) when the air pressure falls into the pressure range
         specified by the manufacturer. Usually within the range of 20 to 45 psi.

If the tractor protection valve doesn't work properly, an air hose or trailer brake leak could drain all the
air from the tractor. This would cause the emergency brakes to come on, with possible loss of control.

TEST TRAILER EMERGENCY BRAKES.
    · Charge the trailer air brake system and check that the trailer rolls freely.

207  Section 7: Doubles and Triples
    · Then stop and pull out the trailer air supply control (also called tractor protection valve control
         or trailer emergency valve) or place it in the "emergency" position.

    · Pull gently on the trailer with the tractor to check that the trailer emergency brakes are on.

TEST TRAILER SERVICE BRAKES.
    · Check for normal air pressure,
    · Release the parking brakes,
    · Move the vehicle forward slowly and apply trailer brakes with the hand control (trolley valve), if
         so equipped.
             o You should feel the brakes come on. This tells you the trailer brakes are connected and
                  working. The trailer brakes should be tested with the hand valve, but controlled in
                  normal operation with the foot pedal, which applies air to the service brakes at all
                  wheels.

Section 7 Test Your Knowledge

    1. What is a converter dolly?
    2. Do converter dollies have spring brakes?
    3. What three methods can you use to secure a second trailer before coupling?
    4. How do you check to make sure trailer height is correct before coupling?
    5. What do you check when making a visual check of coupling?
    6. Why should you pull a dolly out from under a trailer before you disconnect it from the trailer in

         front?
    7. What should you check for when inspecting the converter dolly? The pintle hook?
    8. Should the shut-off valves on the rear of the last trailer be open or closed?
    9. Should the shut-off valves on the first trailer in a set of doubles be open or closed?
    10. Should the shut-off valves on the middle trailer of a set of triples be open or closed?
    11. How can you test that air flows to all trailers?
    12. How do you know if your converter dolly is equipped with antilock brakes?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read Section 7.

208  Section 7: Doubles and Triples
Section 8: Tank Vehicles

This Section Covers

    1. Inspecting Tank Vehicles
    2. Driving Tank Vehicles
    3. Safe Driving Rules

This section has information to help you pass the CDL knowledge test for driving a tank vehicle. You
should also study Sections 2, 5, 6, and 9.

A tank endorsement is required for certain vehicles that transport liquids or gases. The liquid or gas
does not have to be a hazardous material.

You need a tank endorsement on your CDL if:

Vehicle needs a Class A or B CDL and you want to haul a liquid or liquid gas in a tank or tanks having
an individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate rated capacity of 1000
gallons or more that is either permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or the chassis.

Your vehicle is Class C and used to transport hazardous materials in liquid or gas form in the above
described rated tanks.

Before loading, unloading, or driving a tanker, inspect the vehicle. This makes sure that the vehicle is
safe to carry the liquid or gas and is safe to drive.

8.1 ­ Inspecting Tank Vehicles

Tank vehicles have special items you need to check. Tank vehicles come in many types and sizes.
You need to check the vehicle's operator manual to make sure you know how to inspect your tank
vehicle.

8.1.1 ­ Leaks

On all tank vehicles, the most important thing to check for is leaks. Check under and around the
vehicle for signs of any leaking. Don't carry liquids or gases in a leaking tank. To do so is a crime.
You will be cited and prevented from driving further. You may also be liable for the clean-up of
any spill.

You should inspect the following:

209  Section 8: Tank Vehicles
    · Check the tank's body or shell for dents or leaks.
    · Check the intake, discharge, and cut-off valves. Make sure the valves are in the correct

         position before loading, unloading, or moving the vehicle.
    · Check pipes, connections, and hoses for leaks, especially around joints.
    · Check manhole covers and vents. Make sure the covers have gaskets and they

         close correctly.
    · Keep the vents clear so they work correctly.

8.1.2 ­ Check Special Purpose Equipment

If your vehicle has any of the following equipment, make sure it works:
    · Vapor recovery kits.
    · Grounding and bonding cables. Emergency shut-off systems.
    · Built in fire extinguisher.

Never drive a tank vehicle with open valves or manhole covers.

8.1.3 ­ Special Equipment

Check the emergency equipment needed for your vehicle. Find out what working equipment you must
carry and make sure you have it.

8.2 ­ Driving Tank Vehicles

Hauling liquids in tanks requires special skills because of the high center of gravity and liquid
movement. See Figure 8.1.

     Figure 8.1

210              Section 8: Tank Vehicles
8.2.1 ­ High Center of Gravity

High center of gravity means that much of the load's weight is carried high up off the road. This
makes the vehicle top-heavy. Liquid tankers are especially easy to rollover. Tests have shown that
tankers can turn over at the speed limits posted for curves. Be sure to take highway curves and on
ramp/off ramp curves at speeds well below the posted limit.

8.2.2 ­ Danger of Surge

Liquid surge happens when the liquid in a tank moves around suddenly to one side of the tank. This
movement can have bad effects on your vehicle's handling. For example, when coming to a stop, the
liquid will surge back and forth. When the wave hits the end of the tank, it tends to push the truck in
the direction the wave is moving. If the truck is on a slippery surface like ice, the wave can shove the
truck out into an intersection. You must be very familiar with the way your vehicle handles when
driving a liquid tanker.

8.2.3 ­ Bulkheads

Some liquid tanks are divided into several smaller tanks by bulkheads. When loading and unloading
the smaller tanks, the driver must pay attention to weight distribution. Don't put too much weight on
the front or rear of the vehicle.

8.2.4 ­ Baffled Tanks

Baffled liquid tanks have bulkheads in them with holes that let the liquid flow through. The baffles help
to control the forward and backward liquid surge. Side-to-side surge can still occur. This can cause
rollover.

8.2.5 ­ Un-baffled Tanks

Un-baffled liquid tankers (sometimes called "smooth bore" tanks) have nothing inside to slow down
the flow of the liquid. This makes the forward-and-back surge very strong. Un-baffled tanks usually
transport food products like milk, for example. Sanitation regulations don't allow the use of baffles
because of how difficult it is to clean the inside of the tank. Be extremely slow and careful when
driving smooth bore tanks, especially when starting and stopping.

211  Section 8: Tank Vehicles
                                                             Figure 8.2

8.2.6 ­ Outage

Never load a cargo tank totally full. Liquids expand as they warm and you must leave room for the
expanding liquid. This is called "outage." Since different liquids expand by different amounts, they
require different amounts of outage. You must know the outage requirement when hauling liquids in
bulk.

8.2.7 ­ How Much to Load?

A full tank of dense liquid (such as some acids) may exceed legal weight limits. For that reason,
you may often only partially fill tanks with heavy liquids. The amount of liquid to load into a tank
depends on:

    · The amount the liquid will expand in transit.
    · The weight of the liquid.
    · Legal weight limits.

212  Section 8: Tank Vehicles
8.3 ­ Safe Driving Rules

To drive tank vehicles safely, you must remember to follow all the safe driving rules. A few of these
rules are:

    · Drive Smoothly ­ Because of the high center of gravity and the surge of the liquid, you must
         start, slow down, and stop very smoothly. You must also make smooth turns and lane
         changes.

    · Controlling Surge
             o Keep a steady pressure on the brakes. Do not release too soon when coming to a stop.
             o Brake far in advance of a stop and increase your following distance.
             o If you must make a quick stop to avoid a crash, use controlled or stab braking. If you do
                  not remember how to stop using these methods, review subsection 2.17.2. Also,
                  remember that if you steer quickly while braking, you may cause vehicle rollover.

    · Curves ­ Slow down before curves, then accelerate slightly through the curve. The posted
         speed for a curve may be too fast for a tank vehicle.

    · Stopping Distance ­ Keep in mind how much space you need to stop your vehicle.
         Remember that wet roads double the normal stopping distance. Empty tank vehicles may take
         longer to stop than full ones.

    · Skids ­ Don't oversteer, over accelerate, or over brake. If you do, your vehicle may skid. On
         tank trailers, if your drive wheels or trailer wheels begin to skid, your vehicle may jackknife.
         When any vehicle starts to skid, you must restore traction to the wheels.

Section 8 Test Your Knowledge

    1. How are bulkheads different from baffles?
    2. Should a tank vehicle take curves, on ramps, or off ramps at the posted speed limits?
    3. How are smooth bore tankers different to drive than those with baffles?
    4. What three things determine how much liquid you can load?
    5. What is outage?
    6. How can you help control surge?
    7. What two reasons make special care necessary when driving tank vehicles?

These questions may be on the test. If you can't answer them all, re-read Section 8.

213  Section 8: Tank Vehicles
Section 9: Hazardous Materials

This Section Covers

    1. The Reason for the Regulations
    2. How to Load, Unload and Mark a Bulk Tank
    3. Driver Responsibilities
    4. Driving and Parking Rules
    5. Communications Rules
    6. Emergencies
    7. Loading and Unloading

Hazardous materials (often called HAZMAT) are products that can harm people, the environment, or
property during transportation. You might see the term HAZMAT on road signs or safety instructions.
Sometimes it is shortened to HM in government rules. Hazardous materials include:

    · explosives
    · various types of gas
    · solids
    · flammable and combustible liquid
    · hazardous substances
    · hazardous waste
    · marine pollutants

There is a lot of dangerous risk involved in transporting and storing hazardous materials. All levels of
government regulate how hazardous materials can be handled and transported.

The Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR) are found in Title 49 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR), Parts 171 through 180. These regulations are commonly cited as 49 CFR 171-
180 and are issued by the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), which
is part of the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT)

The Hazardous Materials Table in the regulations has a list of these items. However, this list does not
include all hazardous materials. A material is considered hazardous based on its characteristics and
the shipper's decision on if it meets a definition of a hazardous material in the regulations.

The regulations require vehicles transporting certain types or amounts of hazardous materials to
display diamond-shaped, square on point, warning signs called placards.

This section will help you understand what you need to do when you're transporting hazardous
materials. However, hazmat rules and government regulations can change often, so this information

214  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
may not always be completely up to date and can change often. An up-to-date copy of the complete
regulations is essential for you to have. Included in these regulations is a complete glossary of terms.

You must have a CDL with a hazardous materials endorsement before you drive any vehicle to
transport hazardous material as defined in Title 49 CFR 383.5 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Regulations. You must pass a written test about the regulations and requirements to get this
endorsement.

Everything you need to know to pass the written test is in this section. There is a lot more information
about working with hazardous materials you will need to know as a CDL driver.

The regulations require training and testing for all drivers involved in transporting hazardous
materials. Your employer or a designated representative is required to provide this training and
testing. Hazardous materials employers are required to keep a record of training for each employee
as long as that employee is working with hazardous materials, and for 90 days after. The regulations
require people working with hazardous materials be trained and tested at least once every three
years.

All drivers must be trained in the security risks of hazardous materials transportation. This training
must include how to recognize and respond to possible security threats.

The regulations also require drivers have special training before:

    · Transporting certain flammable gas materials
    · Transporting controlled quantities of radioactive materials on the highway
    · Transporting cargo tanks and portable tanks

Each driver's employer or designated representative must provide such training.

Some locations require permits to transport certain explosives or bulk hazardous wastes. States and
counties also may require drivers to follow special hazardous materials routes. The federal
government may require permits or exemptions for special hazardous materials cargo such as rocket
fuel. Find out about permits, exemptions, and special routes for the places you drive.

9.1 ­ The Intent of the Regulations

9.1.1 ­ Contain the Material

Transporting hazardous materials can be risky. The regulations are intended to protect you, those
around you, and the environment. They tell shippers how to package the materials safely and drivers
how to load, transport, and unload the material. These are called containment rules.

215  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
9.1.2 ­ Communicate the Risk

To communicate the risk, shippers must warn drivers and others about the material's hazards.
hippers must put hazard warning labels on packages, provide proper shipping papers, emergency
response information, and placards. These steps communicate the hazard to the shipper, the carrier,
and the driver.

9.1.3 ­ Assure Safe Drivers and Equipment

To get a hazardous materials endorsement on your CDL, you must pass a written test about
transporting hazardous materials. To pass the test, you must know how to:

    · Identify what are hazardous materials.
    · Safely load shipments.
    · Properly placard your vehicle
    · Safely transport shipments.

Learn the rules and follow them. Following the rules reduces the risk of injury from hazardous
materials. Taking shortcuts by breaking rules is unsafe. Failure to follow the rules can result in fines
and jail.

Inspect your vehicle before and during each trip. Law enforcement officers may stop and inspect your
vehicle. When they stop you, they may check:

    · Your shipping papers,
    · Vehicle placards,
    · The hazardous materials endorsement on your driver license,
    · and your knowledge of hazardous materials.

9.2 ­ Hazardous Materials Transportation: Who Does What

There are three roles involved in transporting hazardous materials: the shipper, the carrier, and the
driver. Each role has specific things they must do to make sure hazardous materials are transported
safely.

9.2.1 ­ The Shipper

Sends products from one place to another by truck, rail, vessel, or airplane.
Uses the hazardous materials regulations to figure out the product's:

216  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
    · Identification number
    · Proper shipping name.
    · Hazard class.
    · Packing group.
    · Correct packaging.
    · Correct label and markings.
    · Correct placards.
Must package, mark, and label the materials; prepare shipping papers; provide emergency response
information; and supply placards.
Certify on the shipping paper that the shipment has been prepared according to the rules (unless you
are pulling cargo tanks supplied by you or your employer).

9.2.2 ­ The Carrier

Takes the shipment from the shipper to its destination.
Before transportation, checks that the shipper correctly described, marked, labeled, and otherwise
prepared the shipment for transportation.
Refuses improper shipments.

9.2.3 ­ The Driver

Makes sure the shipper has identified, marked, and labeled the hazardous materials properly.
Refuses leaking packages and shipments.
Places placards on the vehicle when loading, if required.
Safely transports the shipment without delay.
Follows all special rules about transporting hazardous materials.
Keeps hazardous materials shipping papers and emergency response information in the right place.
Reports accidents and incidents involving hazardous materials to the right government agency, when
the accident/incident occurs while the driver is in physical control of the shipment.

217  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
9.3 ­ Communication Rules

9.3.1 ­ Definitions

Some words and phrases have special meanings when talking about hazardous materials. Some of
these may differ from meanings you are used to. The words and phrases in this section may be on
your test. The meanings of other important words are in the glossary at the end of Section 9.
A material's hazard class reflects the risks associated with it. There are nine different hazard classes.
The types of materials included in these nine classes are in Figure 9.1.

218  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
         Figure 9.1: Hazardous Materials Class Chart

Class  Division Name of Class or Division Examples
   1
       1.1  Mass Explosion              Dynamite, Flares, Display Fireworks, Ammunition, Blasting
   1                                    Agents, Explosive Devices

   1   1.2  Projection Hazard           Dynamite, Flares, Display Fireworks, Ammunition, Blasting
                                        Agents, Explosive Devices
   1
       1.3  Fire Hazard                 Dynamite, Flares, Display Fireworks, Ammunition, Blasting
   1                                    Agents, Explosive Devices

   1   1.4  Minor Explosion             Dynamite, Flares, Display Fireworks, Ammunition, Blasting
                                        Agents, Explosive Devices
   2
   2   1.5  Very Insensitive            Dynamite, Flares, Display Fireworks, Ammunition, Blasting
   2                                    Agents, Explosive Devices
   3
   4   1.6  Extremely Insensitive       Dynamite, Flares, Display Fireworks, Ammunition, Blasting
   4                                    Agents, Explosive Devices
   4
   5   2.1  Flammable Gases             Propane
   5
   6   2.2  Non-Flammable Gases         Helium
   6
   7   2.3  Poisonous/Toxic Gases       Fluorine, Compressed
   8
   9        Flammable Liquids           Gasoline

None   4.1  Flammable Solids            Ammonium Picrate, Wetted White Phosphorus Sodium

None   4.2  Spontaneously Combustible Ammonium Picrate, Wetted White Phosphorus Sodium

       4.3  Dangerous When Wet          Ammonium Picrate, Wetted White Phosphorus Sodium

       5.1  Oxidizers                   Ammonium Nitrate

       5.2  Organic Peroxides           Methyl Ethyl Ketone Peroxide

       6.1  Poison (Toxic Material)     Potassium Cyanide

       6.2  Infectious Substances       Anthrax Virus

            Radioactive                 Uranium

            Corrosive                   Battery Fluid

            Miscellaneous Hazardous Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCB)

            Materials

            ORM-D                       Food Flavorings, Medicines

            (Other Regulated Material-

            Domestic)

            Combustible Liquids         Fuel Oil

219                                                                   Section 9: Hazardous Materials
A shipping paper describes the hazardous materials being transported. Shipping orders, bills of
lading, and manifests are all types of shipping papers. Figure 9.6 shows an example shipping paper.

After a crash or hazardous materials spill or leak, you may be injured and unable to communicate the
hazards of the materials you are transporting. Firefighters and police can best do their jobs to help at
the scene if they know what hazardous materials are being carried. Your life, and the lives of others,
may depend on quickly finding the hazardous materials shipping papers.

For that reason, the rules require:

    · Shippers to describe hazardous materials correctly and include an emergency response
         telephone number on shipping papers.

    · Carriers and drivers to quickly identify hazardous materials shipping papers, or keep them on
         top of other shipping papers and keep the required emergency response information with the
         shipping papers.

    · Drivers to keep hazardous materials shipping papers:
             o In a pouch on the driver's door, or
             o In clear view within immediate reach while the seat belt is fastened while driving, or
             o On the driver's seat when out of the vehicle.

9.3.2 ­ Package Labels

Shippers put diamond-shaped hazard warning labels on most hazardous materials packages. These
labels inform others of the hazard. If the diamond label won't fit on the package, shippers may put the
label on a tag securely attached to the package. For example, compressed gas cylinders that will not
hold a label will have tags or decals. Labels look like the examples in Figure 9.2.

     Figure 9.2: Examples of HAZMAT Labels

220                                         Section 9: Hazardous Materials
9.3.3 ­ Lists of Regulated Products

Placards. Placards are used to warn others of hazardous materials. Placards are signs put on the
outside of a vehicle and on bulk packages, which identify the hazard class of the cargo. See
Figure 9.3.

A placarded vehicle must have at least four identical placards. They are put on the front, rear, and
both sides of the vehicle.

Placards must be placed where they can be seen on all four sides of your vehicle. They are at least
250 mm or 9.84 inches square with the square-on-point, in a diamond shape. Cargo tanks and other
bulk packaging show the identification number of their contents on:

    · Placards or
    · Orange panels or
    · White square-on-point displays

     Figure 9.3: Examples of HAZMAT Placards

Identification numbers are a four-digit code used by first responders to identify hazardous materials.
An identification number may be used to identify more than one chemical. The letters "NA or "UN" will
precede the identification number. The United States Department of Transportation's Emergency
Response Guidebook (ERG) lists the chemicals and the identification numbers assigned to them.

There are three main lists used by shippers, carriers, and drivers when trying to identify hazardous
materials. Before transporting a material, look for its name on three lists. Some materials are on all
lists, others on only one. Always check the following lists:

    · Section 172.101, the Hazardous Materials Table.

    · Appendix A to Section 172.101, the List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities.

    · Appendix B to Section 172.101, the List of Marine Pollutants.

221                                           Section 9: Hazardous Materials
The Hazardous Materials Table. Figure 9.4 shows part of the Hazardous Materials Table.

Column 1: Symbols tells which shipping mode(s) the entry affects and other information concerning
the shipping description. The next five columns show each material's shipping name, hazard class or
division, identification number, packaging group, and required labels.

Six different symbols may appear in Column 1 of the table.

    · (+) ­ Shows the proper shipping name, hazard class, and packing group to use, even if the
         material doesn't meet the hazard class definition.

    · (A) ­ Means the hazardous material described in Column 2 is subject to the HMR only when
         offered or intended for transport by air unless it is a hazardous substance or hazardous waste.

    · (W) ­ Means the hazardous material described in Column 2 is subject to the HMR only when
         offered or intended for transportation by water unless it is a hazardous substance, hazardous
         waste, or marine pollutant.

    · (D) ­ Means the proper shipping name is appropriate for describing materials for domestic
         transportation but may not be proper for international transportation.

    · (I) ­ Identifies a proper shipping name that is used to describe materials in international
         transportation. A different shipping name may be used when only domestic transportation is
         involved.

    · (G) ­ Means this hazardous material described in Column 2 is a generic shipping name. A
         generic shipping name must be accompanied by a technical name on the shipping paper. A
         technical name is a specific chemical that makes the product hazardous

Column 2: Hazardous materials descriptions and proper shipping names lists the proper
shipping names and descriptions of regulated materials. Entries are in alphabetical order so you can
quickly find the right entry. The table shows proper shipping names in regular type. The shipping
paper must show proper shipping names. Names shown in italics are not proper shipping names.

       49 CFR 172.101 Sample of Hazardous Materials Table

     Figure 9.4

222              Section 9: Hazardous Materials
                        Appendix A to 49 CFR 172.101
     List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities

Hazardous Substances                         Reportable Quantity (RQ) Pounds
                                             (Kilograms)
Phenyl mercaptan                            100 (45.4)
Phenylmercury acetate                        100 (45.4)
Phenylthiourea                               100 (45.4)
Phorate                                      10 (4.54)
Phosgene                                    10 (4.54)
Phosphine                                   100 (45.4)
Phosphoric acid                             5,000 (2270)
Phosphoric acid, diethyl 4-nitrophenyl
ester                                       100 (45.4)
Phosphoric acid, lead (2+) Salt (2:3) salt
                                            10 (.454)

                                            Figure 9.5

Column 3: Hazard class or Division shows a material's hazard class or division, or the entry
"Forbidden." Never transport a "Forbidden" material. Placard hazardous materials shipments based
on the quantity and hazard class. You can decide which placards to use if you know these three
things:

    · The material's hazard class.

    · Amount being shipped.

    · Amount of all hazardous materials of all classes on your vehicle.

Column 4: Identification Numbers lists the identification number for each proper shipping name.
Identification numbers are preceded by the letters "UN", "NA" or "ID". The letters "UN" mean "United
Nations" are for proper shipping names used for both international transportation as well as domestic
transportation. The letters "NA" are associated with proper shipping names that are only used within
the United States and to and from Canada. The letters "ID" are associated with proper shipping
names recognized by the International Civil Aviation Organization (IACO) Technical instructions for
transportation by air. The identification number must appear on both the shipping paper as part of the
shipping description and on the package. It also must appear on cargo tanks and other bulk
packaging. Police and firefighters use this number to quickly identify the hazardous materials.

Column 5: PG shows the packing group (in Roman numeral) assigned to a material.

Column 6: Label Codes shows the hazard warning label(s) shippers must put on packages of
hazardous materials. Some products require use of more than one label due to multiple hazards
being present.

223                                                     Section 9: Hazardous Materials
Column 7: Special Provisions lists the additional (special) provisions that apply to this material.
When there is an entry in this column, you must refer to the federal regulations for specific
information. The numbers 1- 6 in this column mean the hazardous material is a poison inhalation
hazard (PIH). PIH materials have special requirements for shipping papers, marking, and placards.

Column 8: Packaging is a three-part column showing the section numbers covering the packaging
requirements for each hazardous material.

   NOTE: Columns 9 and 10 do not apply to transportation by highway.

Appendix A to 49 CFR 172.101 ­ The List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities.

The DOT and the EPA want to know about spills of hazardous substances. They are named in the
List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities. See Figure 9.5.

Column 2 of the list shows each product's reportable quantity (RQ). When these materials are being
transported in a reportable quantity or more in one package, the shipper displays the letters RQ on
the shipping paper and package. The letters RQ may appear before or after the basic description.
You or your employer must report spills of these materials if a reportable quantity of the material has
been spilled.

If the words INHALATION HAZARD appear on the shipping paper or package, the rules require
display of the POISON INHALATION HAZARD or POISON GAS placards, as appropriate. These
placards must be used in addition to other placards, which may be required by the product's hazard
class. Always display the hazard class placard and the POISON INHALATION HAZARD placard.

Appendix B to 49 CFR 172.101 ­ List of Marine Pollutants

Appendix B is a listing of chemicals that are toxic to marine life. For highway transportation, this list is
only used for chemicals in a container with a capacity of 119 gallons or more without a placard or
label as specified by the HMR.

Any bulk packages of a Marine Pollutant must display the Marine Pollutant marking, a white triangle
with a fish and an "X" through the fish. This marking is not a placard but must also be displayed on
the outside of the vehicle. In addition, a notation must be made on the shipping papers near the
description of the material: "Marine Pollutant".

9.3.4 ­ The Shipping Paper

The shipping paper shown in Figure 9.6 describes a shipment. A shipping paper for hazardous
materials must include:

    · Page numbers if the shipping paper has more than one page. The first page must tell the total
         number of pages. For example, "Page 1 of 4".

    · A proper shipping description for each hazardous material.
    · A shipper's certification, signed by the shipper, saying they prepared the shipment according to

         the regulations.

224  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
     Shipping Paper Example

                                                             Figure 9.6

9.3.5 ­ The Item Description

If a shipping paper describes both hazardous and non-hazardous cargo, the hazardous materials
must be:

    · Entered first.
    · Highlighted in a contrasting color, OR
    · Identified by an "X" placed before the shipping description (describing what the item is) in a

         column captioned "HM".

225                          Section 9: Hazardous Materials
   NOTE: The letters "RQ" may be used instead of "X" if a reportable quantity needs to be
   identified.

The basic description of hazardous materials includes:

    · The identification number,
    · Proper shipping name,
    · Hazard class or division,
    · And the packing group, if any, in that order. The packing group is displayed in Roman

         numerals and may be preceded by "PG".

Identification number, shipping name, and hazard class must not be abbreviated unless specifically
authorized in the hazardous materials regulations. The description must also show:

    · The total quantity and unit of measure.
    · The number and type of packages (example: "6 Drums").
    · The letters RQ, if a reportable quantity.
    · If the letters RQ appear, the name of the hazardous substance (if not included in the shipping

         name).
    · For all materials with the letter "G" (Generic) in Column 1, the technical name of the hazardous

         material.

Shipping papers must list an emergency response telephone number unless otherwise noted. The
emergency response telephone number is the responsibility of the shipper. It can be used by
emergency responders to obtain information about any hazardous materials involved in a spill or fire.
The telephone number must be:

    · The number of the person offering the hazardous material for transportation (if the
         shipper/offerer is the emergency response information (ERI) provider); or

    · The number of an agency or organization capable of, and accepting responsibility for,
         providing the detailed information required by paragraph (a)(2) of this section. The person who
         is registered with the ERI provider must be identified by name, or contract number or other
         unique identifier assigned by the ERI provider, on the shipping paper.

Shippers must provide emergency response information to the motor carrier for each hazardous
material being shipped. The emergency response information must be able to be used away from the
motor vehicle. This means it can't be kept attached to the vehicle or depend on the vehicle to be
used. The emergency response information must explain how to safely handle incidents involving the
material. At a minimum, it must include the following information:

    · The basic description and technical name; Immediate hazards to health;
    · Risks of fire or explosion;
    · Immediate precautions to be taken in the event of an accident or incident;

226  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
    · Immediate methods for handling fires;
    · Initial methods for handling spills or leaks in the absence of fires; and
    · Preliminary first aid measures

This information can be on the shipping paper or some other document that includes the basic
description and technical name of the hazardous material. Or, it may be in a guidance book such as
the Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG). Motor carriers may assist shippers by keeping an
ERG on each vehicle carrying hazardous materials. The driver must provide the emergency response
information to any federal, state, or local authority responding to a hazardous materials incident or
investigating one.

Total quantity and number & type of packages must appear before or after the basic description. The
packaging type and the unit of measurement may be abbreviated.

FOR EXAMPLE:

10 ctns. UN1263, Paint, 3, PG II, 500 lbs.

The shipper of hazardous wastes must put the word WASTE before the proper shipping name of the
material on the shipping paper (hazardous waste manifest).

FOR EXAMPLE:

UN1090, Waste Acetone, 3, PG II.

A non-hazardous material may not be described by using a hazard class or an identification number.

Shippers must keep a copy of shipping papers (or an electronic image) for 2 years after the initial
carrier accepts the material. Shippers must keep a copy of papers for hazardous waste for 3 years.

If you are only the carrier and not the original shipper of the cargo, you must keep a copy of the
shipping paper for 1 year upon receipt of the cargo.

   NOTE: To view complete regulatory requirements for the transportation of hazardous
   materials one should refer to the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Parts 171-185.

9.3.6 ­ Shipper's Certification

When the shipper packages hazardous materials, they certify the package has been prepared
according to the rules. The signed shipper's certification appears on the original shipping paper.
The only exceptions are:

    · When a shipper is a private carrier transporting their own product and
    · When the package is provided by the carrier (for example, a cargo tank).

227  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
Unless a package is clearly unsafe or does not comply with the HMR, you may accept the shipper's
certification concerning proper packaging. Some carriers have additional rules about transporting
hazardous materials. Follow your employer's rules when accepting shipments.

9.3.7 ­ Package Markings and Labels

Shippers print required markings directly on the package, an attached label, or tag. An important
package marking is the name of the hazardous material. It is the same name as the one on the
shipping paper. The requirements for marking vary by package size and material being transported.
When required, the shipper will put the following on the package:

    · The name and address of the shipper or consignee.
    · The hazardous material's shipping name and identification number.
    · All required labels

It is a good idea to compare the shipping paper to the markings and labels. Always make sure the
shipper shows the correct basic description on the shipping paper, and verifies the right labels are
shown on the packages. If you are not familiar with the material, ask the shipper to contact your
office.

If rules require it, the shipper will put one of the following on the package:

    · RQ,
    · Marine Pollutant,
    · Biohazard,
    · Hot,
    · Inhalation-Hazard

Packages with liquid containers inside will also have package orientation markings with the arrows
pointing in the correct upright direction. The labels used always reflect the hazard class of the
product. If a package needs more than one label, the labels must be close together and near the
proper shipping name.

9.3.8 ­ Recognizing Hazardous Materials

Learn to recognize shipments of hazardous materials. To find out if the shipment includes hazardous
materials, look at the shipping paper. Does it have:

    · An entry with a proper shipping name, hazard class, and identification number?
    · A highlighted entry, or one with an X or RQ in the hazardous materials column?

Other clues suggesting hazardous materials:

    · What business is the shipper in?

228  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
              o Examples: Paint dealer, Chemical supply, Scientific supply house, Pest control or
                  agricultural supplier, Explosives, munitions, or fireworks dealer

     · Are there tanks with diamond labels or placards on the premises?

     · What type of package is being shipped? Cylinders and drums are often used for hazardous
         materials shipments.

     · Is a hazard class label, proper shipping name, or identification number on the package?

     · Are there any handling precautions?

9.3.9 ­ Hazardous Waste Manifest

When transporting hazardous waste, you must sign and carry a Uniform Hazardous Waste
Manifest. The name and EPA registration number of the shippers, carriers, and destination must
appear on the manifest. Shippers must prepare, date, and sign by hand the manifest.

Treat the manifest as a shipping paper when transporting the waste. Only give the waste shipment to
another registered carrier or disposal/treatment facility. Each carrier transporting the shipment must
sign the manifest. After you deliver the shipment, keep your copy of the manifest. Each copy must
have all needed signatures and dates, including those of the person to whom you delivered the
waste.

9.3.10 ­ Placarding

Attach the appropriate placards to the vehicle before you drive it. You are only allowed to move an
improperly placarded vehicle during an emergency, in order to protect life or property.

Placards must appear on both sides and both ends of the vehicle. Each placard must be:

    · Easily seen from the direction it faces.
    · Placed so the words or numbers are level and read from left to right.
    · At least three inches away from any other markings.
    · Kept clear of attachments or devices such as ladders, doors, and tarpaulins.
    · Kept clean and undamaged so that the color, format, and message are easily seen.
    · Be affixed to a background of contrasting color.

No other signs or placards are allowed on the vehicle.

The front placard may be on the front of the tractor or the front of the trailer.

To decide which placards to use, you need to know:

    · The hazard class of the materials.
    · The amount of hazardous materials shipped.
    · The total weight of all classes of hazardous materials in your vehicle.

229  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
9.3.11 ­ Placard Tables

There are two placard tables, Table 1 and Table 2. Table 1 materials must be placarded whenever
any amount is transported. See Figure 9.7.

Except for bulk packaging, the hazard classes in Table 2 need placards only if the total amount
transported is 1,001 pounds or more including the package. Add the amounts from all shipping
papers for all the Table 2 products you have on board. See Figure 9.8.

     Figure 9.7: Placard Table 1 Any Amount

IF YOUR VEHICLE CONTAINS                         PLACARD AS...
ANY AMOUNT OF...
1.1 Mass Explosives                              Explosives 1.1
1.2 Project Hazards                              Explosives 1.2
1.3 Mass Fire Hazards                            Explosives 1.3
2.3 Poisonous/Toxic Gases                        Poison Gas
4.3 Dangerous When Wet                           Dangerous When Wet
5.2 (Organic Peroxide, Type B, liquid or solid,  Organic Peroxide
Temperature controlled)
                                                 Poison/toxic inhalation
6.1 (Inhalation hazard zone A & B only)          Radioactive
7 (Radioactive Yellow III label only)

You may use DANGEROUS placards instead of separate placards for each Table 2 hazard
class when:

    · You have 1,001 pounds or more of two or more Table 2 hazard classes, requiring different
         placards, and

    · You have not loaded 2,205 pounds or more of any Table 2 hazard class material at any one
         place. You must use the specific placard for this material.

The dangerous placard is an option, not a requirement. You can always placard for the materials.

If the words INHALATION HAZARD are on the shipping paper or package, you must display POISON
GAS or POISON INHALATION placards in addition to any other placards needed by the product's
hazard class. The 1,000 pound exception does not apply to these materials.

230                                                                       Section 9: Hazardous Materials
Materials with a secondary hazard of dangerous when wet must display the DANGEROUS WHEN
WET placard in addition to any other placards needed by the product's hazard class. The 1,000-
pound exception to placarding does not apply to these materials.

       Figure 9.8: Placard Table 2 1,001 Pounds Or More

Category of Material (Hazard class or division number and additional  Placard Name
description, as appropriate)

1.4 Minor Explosion                                                   Explosives 1.4
1.5 Very Insensitive                                                  Explosives 1.5
1.6 Extremely Insensitive                                             Explosives 1.6
2.1 Flammable Gases                                                   Flammable Gas
2.2 Non- Flammable Gases                                              Non-Flammable Gas.
3 Flammable Liquids                                                   Flammable
Combustible Liquid                                                    Combustible*
4.1 Flammable Solids                                                  Flammable Solid
4.2 Spontaneously Combustible                                         Spontaneously Combustible
5.1 Oxidizers                                                         Oxidizer
5.2 (other than organic peroxide, Type B, liquid or solid,            Organic Peroxide
Temperature Controlled)

6.1 (other than inhalation hazard zone A or B)                        Poison

6.2 Infectious Substances                                             (None)

8 Corrosives                                                          Corrosive

9 Miscellaneous Hazardous Materials                                   Class 9**

ORM-D                                                                 (None)

*FLAMMABLE may be used in place of a COMBUSTIBLE on a cargo tank or portable tank.
**Class 9 Placard is not required for domestic transportation.

Placards used to identify the primary or subsidiary hazard class of a material must have the hazard
class or division number displayed in the lower corner of the placard. Permanently affixed subsidiary
hazard placards without the hazard class number may be used if they stay within color specifications.

231                                                                              Section 9: Hazardous Materials
Placards may be displayed for hazardous materials even if not needed so long as the placard
identifies the hazard of the material being transported.

Bulk packaging is a single container with a capacity than 119 gallons. A bulk package, and a vehicle
transporting a bulk package, must be placarded, even if it only has the residue of a hazardous
material. Certain bulk packages only must be placarded on the two opposite sides or may display
labels. All other bulk packages must be placarded on all four sides.

Subsections 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3 Test Your Knowledge

    1. Shippers package to __________ the material.
    2. Drivers placard their vehicle to __________ the risk.
    3. What three things do you need to know to decide which placards (if any) you need?
    4. A hazardous materials identification number must appear on the __________ and on

         the__________. The identification number must also appear on cargo tanks and other bulk
         packaging.
    5. Where do you need to keep shipping papers describing hazardous materials?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsections 9.1, 9.2,
and 9.3.

9.4 ­ Loading and Unloading

Do all you can to protect containers of hazardous materials. Don't use any tools, which might damage
containers or other packaging during loading. Don't use hooks.

9.4.1 ­ General Loading Requirements

Before loading or unloading, set the parking brake. Make sure the vehicle will not move. Many
products become more hazardous when exposed to heat. Load hazardous materials away from
heat sources.

Watch for signs of leaking or damaged containers: LEAKS SPELL TROUBLE! Do not transport
leaking packages. Depending on the material, you, your truck, and others could be in danger. It is
illegal to move a vehicle with leaking hazardous materials.

Containers of hazardous materials must be braced to prevent movement of the packages
during transportation.

232  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
NO SMOKING.

When loading or unloading hazardous materials, keep fire away. Don't let people smoke nearby.
Never smoke around:

    · Class 1 (Explosives)
    · Class 2.1 (Flammable Gas )
    · Class 3 (Flammable Liquids)
    · Class 4 (Flammable Solids)
    · Class 5 (Oxidizers)

SECURE AGAINST MOVEMENT

Brace containers so they will not fall, slide, or bounce around during transportation. Be very careful
when loading containers with valves or other fittings. All hazardous materials packages must be
secured during transportation.

After loading, do not open any package during your trip. Never transfer hazardous materials from one
package to another while in transit. You may empty a cargo tank, but do not empty any other package
while it is on the vehicle.

CARGO HEATER RULES
There are special cargo heater rules for loading:

    · Class 1 (Explosives)
    · Class 2.1 (Flammable Gas)
    · Class 3 (Flammable Liquids)

The rules usually forbid use of cargo heaters, including automatic cargo heater/air conditioner units.
Unless you have read all the related rules, don't load the above products in a cargo space that has a
heater.

USE CLOSED CARGO SPACE.
You can't have overhang or tailgate loads of:

    · Class 1 (Explosives)
    · Class 4 (Flammable Solids) Class 5 (Oxidizers)

You must load these hazardous materials into a closed cargo space unless all packages are:

    · Fire and water resistant.
    · Covered with a fire- and water-resistant tarp.

233  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
9.4.2 ­ Precautions for Specific Hazards

CLASS 1 (EXPLOSIVES) MATERIALS

Turn your engine off before loading or unloading any explosives. Then check the cargo space.
You must:

    · Disable cargo heaters. Disconnect heater power sources and drain heater fuel tanks.
    · Make sure there are no sharp points that might damage cargo. Look for bolts, screws, nails,

         broken side panels, and broken floorboards.
    · Use a floor lining with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3. The floors must be tight and the liner must be

         either non-metallic material or non-ferrous metal. Non-ferrous metals are any metal that does
         not contain iron or iron alloys.

Use extra care to protect explosives. Never use hooks or other metal tools. Never drop, throw, or roll
packages. Protect explosive packages from other cargo that might cause damage.

Do not transfer a Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 from one vehicle to another on a public roadway except in
an emergency. If safety requires an emergency transfer, set out red warning reflectors, flags, or
electric lanterns. You must warn others on the road.

Never transport damaged packages of explosives. Do not take a package that shows any dampness
or oily stain.

Do not transport Division 1.1 or 1.2 in vehicle combinations if:

    · There is a marked or placarded cargo tank in the combination.
    · The other vehicle in the combination contains: Division 1.1 A (Initiating Explosives).
    · Packages of Class 7 (Radioactive) materials labeled "Yellow III."
    · Division 2.3 (Poisonous Gas) Hazard zone A or B or Division 6.1 (Poisonous) materials Hazard

         zone A.
    · Hazardous materials in a portable tank, on a DOT Spec 106A or 110A tank.

CLASS 2 (COMPRESSED GASES) INCLUDING CRYOGENIC LIQUIDS

If your vehicle doesn't have racks to hold cylinders, the cargo space floor must be flat. The cylinders
must be:

    · Held upright.
    · In racks attached to the vehicle or in boxes that will keep them from turning over.

Cylinders may be loaded in a lying down (horizontal) position as long as the relief valve is positioned
in the vapor space of the container.

234  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
CLASS 4 (FLAMMABLE SOLIDS) AND CLASS 5 (OXIDIZERS) MATERIALS
    · Class 4 materials are solids that react (including fire and explosion) to water, heat, and air or
         even react spontaneously.
    · Class 4 and 5 materials must be completely enclosed in a vehicle or covered securely.
    · Class 4 and 5 materials, which become unstable and dangerous when wet, must be kept dry
         while in transit and during loading and unloading.
    · Materials that are subject to spontaneous combustion or heating must be in vehicles with
         sufficient ventilation.

Division 2.3 (Poisonous Gas) or Division 6.1 (Poisonous) Materials. Never transport these
materials in containers with interconnections. Never load a package labeled POISON or POISON
INHALATION HAZARD in the driver's cab or sleeper or with food material for human or animal
consumption. There are special rules for loading and unloading Class 2 materials in cargo tanks. You
must have special training to do this.

CLASS 7 (RADIOACTIVE) MATERIALS

Some packages of Class 7 (Radioactive) materials have a number called the "transport index." The
transport index tells the degree of control needed during transportation. The shipper labels these
packages Radioactive II or Radioactive III and prints the package's transport index on the label.
Radiation surrounds each package, passing through all nearby packages. To deal with this problem,
the number of packages you can load together is controlled. Their closeness to people, animals, and
unexposed film is also controlled.

The shipper labels these packages Radioactive II or Radioactive III and prints the package's transport
index on the label. The total transport index of all packages in a single vehicle must not be more than
50.

Table A to this section (49 CFR 177-842) shows rules for each transport index. It shows how close
you can load Class 7 (Radioactive) materials to people, animals, or film. For example, you can't leave
a package with a transport index of 1.1 within two feet of people or cargo space walls.

CLASS 8 (CORROSIVE) MATERIALS
    · If loading by hand, load breakable containers of corrosive liquid one by one.
    · Keep them right side up.
    · Do not drop or roll the containers.
    · Load them onto an even floor surface.
    · Stack carboys only if the lower tiers can bear the weight of the upper tiers safely.
    · Do not load nitric acid above any other product.
    · Load charged storage batteries so their liquid won't spill.
    · Keep them right side up.
    · Make sure other cargo won't fall against or short circuit them.

235  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
Never load corrosive liquids next to or above:

    · Division 1.4 (Explosives C).
    · Division 4.1 (Flammable Solids). Division 4.3 (Dangerous When Wet). Class 5 (Oxidizers).
    · Division 2.3, Zone B (Poisonous Gases).

Never load corrosive liquids with:

    · Division 1.1 or 1.2
    · Division 1.3
    · Division 1.5 (Blasting Agents).
    · Division 2.3, Zone A (Poisonous Gases).
    · Division 4.2 (Spontaneously Combustible Materials).
    · Division 6.1, PGI, Zone A (Poison Liquids).

                              Figure 9.9: Do Not Load Table

Do Not Load                   In The Same Vehicle With

Division 6.1 or 2.3 (POISON or Animal or human food unless the poison package is over packed in an approved

poison inhalation hazard      way. Foodstuffs are anything you swallow. However, mouthwash, toothpaste, and

labeled material)             skin creams are not foodstuff.

Division 2.3 (Poisonous) gas  Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Explosives,
Zone A or Division 6.1        Division 5.1 (Oxidizers), Class 3 (Flammable Liquids), Class 8 (Corrosive Liquids),
(Poison) liquids, PGI,        Division 5.2 (Organic Peroxides),
Zone A                        Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Explosives, Division 1.5 (Blasting Agents),
                              Division 2.1 (Flammable Gases), Class 4 (Flammable Solids).

Charged storage batteries     Division 1.1.

Class 1 (Detonating primers) Any other explosives unless in authorized containers or packages.

Division 6.1 (Cyanides or     Acids, corrosive materials, or other acidic materials which could release hydrocyanic
cyanide mixtures)             acid.

                              For Example: Cyanides, Inorganic, n.o.s. Silver Cyanide Sodium Cyanide.

Nitric acid (Class 8)         Other materials unless the nitric acid is not loaded above any other material.

236                                                           Section 9: Hazardous Materials
MIXED LOADS
The rules require some products to be loaded separately. You cannot load them together in the same
cargo space. Figure 9.9 lists some examples. The regulations (the Segregation Table for Hazardous
Materials) name other materials you must keep apart.

Subsection 9.4 Test Your Knowledge

    1. Around which hazard classes must you never smoke?
    2. Which three hazard classes should not be loaded into a trailer that has a heater/air conditioner

         unit?
    3. Should the floor liner required for Division 1.1 or 1.2 materials be stainless steel?
    4. At the shipper's dock you're given a paper for 100 cartons of battery acid. You already have

         100 pounds of dry Silver Cyanide on board. What precautions do you have to take?
    5. Name a hazard class that uses transport indexes to determine the amount that can be loaded

         in a single vehicle.
These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsection 9.4.

9.5 ­ Bulk Packaging Marking, Loading, and Unloading

The glossary at the end of this section gives the meaning of the word bulk.
Cargo tanks are bulk packaging permanently attached to a vehicle. Cargo tanks stay on the vehicle
when you load and unload them.
Portable tanks are bulk packaging, which are not permanently attached to a vehicle. The product is
loaded or unloaded while the portable tanks are off the vehicle. Portable tanks are then put on a
vehicle for transportation. There are many types of cargo tanks. The most common cargo tanks are
MC306 for liquids and MC331 for gases.

9.5.1 ­ Markings

You must display the identification number of the hazardous materials in portable tanks, cargo tanks,
and other bulk packaging like dump trucks. Identification numbers are in Column 4 of the Hazardous
Materials Table.

237  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
The rules require black 100 mm (3.9 inch) numbers on orange panels on placards. If your cargo does
not require a placard, you must use a white, diamond-shaped background. Specification cargo tanks
must show re-test date markings.

Portable tanks must show the lessee or owner's name. They must also show the shipping name of
the contents on two opposing sides.

If your portable tank can hold more than 1,000 gallons, the letters of the shipping name must be at
least two inches tall. If your portable tank holds less than 1,000 gallons, the letters of the shipping
name must be one-inch tall.

The identification number must appear on each side and each end of a portable tank or other bulk
packaging that hold 1,000 gallons or more and on two opposing sides, if the portable tank holds less
than 1,000 gallons.

The identification numbers must still be visible when the portable tank is on the motor vehicle. If they
are not visible, you must display the identification number on all four sides of the motor vehicle.

Intermediate bulk containers (IBCs) are bulk packages, but are not required to have the owner's
name or shipping name.

9.5.2 ­ Tank Loading

The person in charge of loading and unloading a cargo tank must be sure a qualified person is always
watching. This person watching the loading or unloading must:

    · Be alert.
    · Have a clear view of the cargo tank.
    · Be within 25 feet of the tank.
    · Know of the hazards of the materials involved.
    · Know the procedures to follow in an emergency.
    · Be authorized to move the cargo tank and able to do so.

There are special attendance rules for cargo tanks transporting propane and anhydrous ammonia.

Close all manholes and valves before moving a tank of hazardous materials, no matter how small the
amount in the tank or how short the distance. Manholes and valves must be closed to prevent leaks.
It is illegal to move a cargo tank with open valves or covers unless it is empty according to 49 CFR
173.29.

9.5.3 ­ Flammable Liquids

Turn off your engine before loading or unloading any flammable liquids. Only run the engine if needed
to operate a pump. Ground a cargo tank correctly before filling it through an open filling hole. Ground
the tank before opening the filling hole, and maintain the ground until after closing the filling hole.

238  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
9.5.4 ­ Compressed Gas

Keep liquid discharge valves on a compressed gas tank closed except when loading and unloading.
Unless your engine runs a pump for product transfer, turn it off when loading or unloading. If you use
the engine, turn it off after product transfer, before you unhook the hose. Unhook all
loading/unloading connections before coupling, uncoupling, or moving a cargo tank. Always chock
trailers and semi-trailers to prevent motion when uncoupled from the power unit.

Subsection 9.5 Test Your Knowledge

    1. What are cargo tanks?
    2. How is a portable tank different from a cargo tank?
    3. Your engine runs a pump used during delivery of compressed gas. Should you turn off the

         engine before or after unhooking hoses after delivery?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsection 9.5.

9.6 ­ Hazardous Materials: Driving and Parking Rules

9.6.1 ­ Parking with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 Explosives

Never park with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives within five feet of the traveled part of the road.
Except for short periods of time needed for vehicle operation necessities (e.g., fueling), do not park
within 300 feet of:

    · A bridge,
    · A tunnel,
    · A building
    · A place where people gather
    · An open fire

If you must park to do your job, do so only briefly.

Don't park on private property unless the owner is aware of the danger. Someone must always watch
the parked vehicle. You may let someone else watch it for you only if your vehicle is:

    · On the shipper's property.

239  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
    · On the carrier's property.
    · On the consignee's property.

You are allowed to leave your vehicle unattended in a safe haven. A safe haven is an approved place
for parking unattended vehicles loaded with explosives. Designation of authorized safe havens is
usually made by local authorities.

9.6.2 ­ Parking a Placarded Vehicle Not Transporting Division 1.1, 1.2, or
1.3 Explosives

You may park a placarded vehicle (not laden with explosives) within five feet of the traveled part of
the road only if your work requires it. Do so only briefly. Someone must always watch the vehicle
when parked on a public roadway or shoulder. Do not uncouple a trailer and leave it with hazardous
materials on a public street. Do not park within 300 feet of an open fire.

9.6.3 ­ Attending Parked Vehicles

The person attending a placarded vehicle must:

    · Be in the vehicle, awake, and not in the sleeper berth, or within 100 feet of the vehicle and
         have it within clear view.

    · Be aware of the hazards of the materials being transported.
    · Know what to do in emergencies.
    · Be able to move the vehicle, if needed.

9.6.4 ­ No Flares!

You might break down and have to use stopped vehicle signals. Use reflective triangles or red electric
lights. Never use burning signals, such as flares or fuses, around a:

Tank used for Class 3 (Flammable Liquids) or Division 2.1 (Flammable Gas) whether loaded or
empty.

Vehicle loaded with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 Explosives.

9.6.5 ­ Route Restrictions

Some states and counties require permits to transport hazardous materials or wastes. They may limit
the routes you can use. Local rules about routes and permits change often. It is your job as driver to
find out if you need permits or must use special routes. Make sure you have all the needed papers
before starting.

If you work for a carrier, ask your dispatcher about route restrictions or permits.

240  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
If you are an independent trucker and are planning a new route, check with state agencies where you
plan to travel.

Some localities prohibit transportation of hazardous materials through tunnels, over bridges, or other
roadways. Always check before you start.

Whenever placarded, avoid heavily populated areas, crowds, tunnels, narrow streets, and alleys.
Take other routes, even if inconvenient, unless there is no other way. Never drive a placarded vehicle
near open fires unless you can safely pass without stopping.

If transporting Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives, you must have a written route plan and follow that
plan. Carriers prepare the route plan in advance and give the driver a copy. You may plan the route
yourself if you pick up the explosives at a location other than your employer's terminal. Write out the
plan in advance. Keep a copy of it with you while transporting the explosives. Deliver shipments of
explosives only to authorized persons or leave them in locked rooms designed for explosives storage.

A carrier must choose the safest route to transport placarded radioactive materials. After choosing the
route, the carrier must tell the driver about the radioactive materials, and show the route plan.

9.6.6 ­ No Smoking

Do not smoke within 25 feet of a placarded cargo tank used for Class 3 (flammable liquids) or
Division

2.1 (gases). Also, do not smoke or carry a lighted cigarette, cigar, or pipe within 25 feet of any
vehicle, which contains:

    · Class 1 (Explosives)
    · Class 3 (Flammable Liquids) Class 4.1 (Flammable Solids)
    · Class 4.2 (Spontaneously Combustible) Class 5 (Oxidizers)

9.6.7 ­ Refuel with Engine Off

Turn off your engine before fueling a motor vehicle containing hazardous materials. Someone must
always be at the nozzle, controlling fuel flow.

9.6.8 ­ 10 B:C Fire Extinguisher

The power unit of placarded vehicles must have a fire extinguisher with a UL rating of 10 B:C or
more.

9.6.9 ­ Check Tires

Make sure your tires are properly inflated.

241  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
You must examine each tire on a motor vehicle at the beginning of each trip and each time the
vehicle is parked.

The only acceptable way to check tire pressure is to use a tire pressure gauge.

Do not drive with a tire that is leaking or flat except to the nearest safe place to fix it. Remove any
overheated tire. Place it a safe distance from your vehicle. Don't drive until you correct the cause of
the overheating. Remember to follow the rules about parking and attending placarded vehicles. They
apply even when checking, repairing, or replacing tires.

9.6.10 ­ Where to Keep Shipping Papers and Emergency
Response Information

Do not accept a hazardous materials shipment without a properly prepared shipping paper. A
shipping paper for hazardous materials must always be easily recognized. Other people must be able
to find it quickly after a crash.

Clearly distinguish hazardous materials shipping papers from others by tabbing them or keeping them
on top of the stack of papers.

When you are behind the wheel, keep shipping papers within your reach (with your seat belt on), or in
a pouch on the driver's door. They must be easily seen by someone entering the cab.

When not behind the wheel, leave shipping papers in the driver's door pouch or on the driver's seat.

Emergency response information must be kept in the same location as the shipping paper.

Papers for Division 1.1, 1.2 or, 1.3 Explosives.

A carrier must give each driver transporting Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives a copy of Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR), Part 397. The carrier must also give written instructions
on what to do if delayed or in an accident. The written instructions must include:

    · The names and telephone numbers of people to contact (including carrier agents or shippers).
    · The nature of the explosives transported.
    · The precautions to take in emergencies such as fires, accidents, or leaks.

Drivers must sign a receipt for these documents. You must be familiar with, and have in your
possession while driving, the:

    · Shipping papers.
    · Written emergency instructions. Written route plan.
    · A copy of FMCSR, Part 397.

242  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
9.6.11 ­ Equipment for Chlorine

A driver transporting chlorine in cargo tanks must have an approved gas mask in the vehicle. The
driver must also have an emergency kit for controlling leaks in dome cover plate fittings on the cargo
tank.

9.6.12 ­ Stop Before Railroad Crossings

Stop before a railroad crossing if your vehicle:

    · Is placarded.
    · Carries any amount of chlorine.
    · Has cargo tanks, whether loaded or empty, used for hazardous materials.
You must stop 15 to 50 feet before the nearest rail. Proceed only when you are sure no train is
coming and you can clear the tracks without stopping. Don't shift gears while crossing the tracks.

9.7 ­ Hazardous Materials: Emergencies

9.7.1 ­ Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG)

The Department of Transportation has a guidebook for firefighters, police, and industry workers on
how to protect themselves and the public from hazardous materials. The guide is indexed by proper
shipping name and hazardous materials identification number. Emergency personnel look for these
things on the shipping paper. That is why it is vital that the proper shipping name, identification
number, label, and placards are correct.

9.7.2 ­ Crashes/Incidents

As a professional driver, your job at the scene of a crash or an incident is to:

    · Keep people away from the scene.
    · Limit the spread of material, only if you can safely do so.
    · Communicate the danger of the hazardous materials to emergency response personnel.
    · Provide emergency responders with the shipping papers and emergency response

         information.
    · Follow this checklist:
    · Check to see that your driving partner is OK. Keep shipping papers with you.

243                                     Section 9: Hazardous Materials
    · Keep people far away and upwind. Warn others of the danger.
    · Call for help.
    · Follow your employer's instructions.

9.7.3 ­ Fires & Leaks

FIRES

You might have to control minor truck fires on the road. However, unless you have the training and
equipment to do so safely, don't fight hazardous materials fires. Dealing with hazardous materials
fires requires special training and protective gear.

When you notice a fire, call for help. You may use the fire extinguisher to keep minor truck fires from
spreading to cargo before firefighters arrive. Feel trailer doors to see if they are hot before opening
them. If it's hot, you may have a cargo fire and should not open the doors. Opening doors lets air in
and may make the fire flare up. Without air, many fires only smolder until firemen arrive, doing less
damage. If your cargo is already on fire, it is not safe to fight the fire. Keep the shipping papers with
you to give to emergency personnel as soon as they arrive. Warn other people of the danger and
keep them away.

LEAKS

If you find a cargo leak, identify the hazardous materials leaking by using shipping papers, labels, or
package location. Do not touch any leaking material. You can injure yourself by touching hazardous
materials. Do not try to identify the material or find the source of a leak by smell. Toxic gases can
destroy your sense of smell and can injure or kill you even if they don't smell. Never eat, drink, or
smoke around a leak or spill.

If hazardous materials are spilling from your vehicle, do not move it any more than safety requires.
You may move off the road and away from places where people gather, if doing so serves safety.
Only move your vehicle if you can do so without danger to yourself or others.

Never continue driving with hazardous materials leaking from your vehicle to find a phone, truck stop,
help, or similar reason. Remember, the carrier pays for the cleanup of contaminated parking lots,
roadways, and drainage ditches. The costs are enormous, so don't leave a lengthy trail of
contamination. If hazardous materials are spilling from your vehicle:

    · Park it.
    · Secure the area. Stay there.
    · Call for help or send someone else for help.
    · When sending someone for help, give that person: A description of the emergency.
    · Your exact location and direction of travel.
    · Your name, the carrier's name, and the name of the community or city where your terminal is

         located.

244  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
    · The proper shipping name, hazard class, and identification number of the hazardous materials,
         if you know them.

This is a lot for someone to remember. It is a good idea to write it all down for the person you send for
help. The emergency response team must know these things to find you and to handle the
emergency. They may have to travel a long way to get to you. This information will help them to bring
the right equipment the first time, without having to go back for it.

Never move your vehicle if it will cause contamination or damage the vehicle. Keep upwind and away
from roadside rests, truck stops, cafes, and businesses. Never try to repack leaking containers. Don't
try to repair leaks unless you have the training and equipment to do so safely. Call your dispatcher or
supervisor for instructions and, if needed, emergency personnel.

9.7.4 ­ Responses to Specific Hazards

CLASS 1 (EXPLOSIVES)
    · If your vehicle has a breakdown or accident while carrying explosives, warn others of the
         danger.
    · Keep bystanders away.
    · Do not allow smoking or open fire near the vehicle.
    · If there is a fire, warn every one of the danger of explosion.
    · Remove all explosives before separating vehicles involved in a collision.
    · Place the explosives at least 200 feet from the vehicles and occupied buildings.
    · Stay a safe distance away.

CLASS 2 (COMPRESSED GASES)
    · If compressed gas is leaking from your vehicle, warn others of the danger.
    · Only permit those involved in removing the hazard or wreckage to get close.
    · You must notify the shipper if compressed gas is involved in any accident.
    · Unless you are fueling machinery used in road construction or maintenance, do not transfer a
         flammable compressed gas from one tank to another on any public roadway.

CLASS 3 (FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS)
    · If you are transporting a flammable liquid and have an accident or your vehicle breaks down,
         prevent bystanders from gathering.
    · Warn people of the danger.
    · Keep them from smoking.
    · Never transport a leaking cargo tank farther than needed to reach a safe place.

245  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
    · Get off the roadway if you can do so safely.
    · Don't transfer flammable liquid from one vehicle to another on a public roadway except in an

         emergency.

CLASS 4 (FLAMMABLE SOLIDS) AND CLASS 5 (OXIDIZING MATERIALS)
    · If a flammable solid or oxidizing material spills, warn others of the fire hazard.
    · Do not open smoldering packages of flammable solids.
    · Remove them from the vehicle if you can safely do so.
    · Also, remove unbroken packages if it decreases the fire hazard.

CLASS 6 (POISONOUS MATERIALS AND INFECTIOUS SUBSTANCES)
    · If you think a Division 2.3 (Poison Gases) or Division 6.1 (Poison Materials) might be
         flammable, take the added precautions needed for flammable liquids or gases.
    · Do not allow smoking, open flame, or welding.
    · Warn others of the hazards of fire, of inhaling vapors, or coming in contact with the poison.
    · A vehicle involved in a leak of Division 2.3 (Poison Gases) or Division 6.1 (Poisons) must be
         checked for stray poison before being used again.
    · If a Division 6.2 (Infectious Substances) package is damaged in handling or transportation, you
         should immediately contact your supervisor. Packages that look damaged or show signs of
         leakage should not be accepted.

CLASS 7 (RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS)
    · If radioactive material is involved in a leak or broken package, tell your dispatcher or
         supervisor as soon as possible.
    · If there is a spill, or if an internal container might be damaged, do not touch or inhale the
         material.
    · Do not use the vehicle until it is cleaned and checked with a survey meter.

CLASS 8 (CORROSIVE MATERIALS)
    · If corrosives spill or leak during transportation, be careful to avoid further damage or injury
         when handling the containers.
    · Parts of the vehicle exposed to a corrosive liquid must be thoroughly washed with water.
    · After unloading, wash out the interior as soon as possible before reloading.
    · If continuing to transport a leaking tank would be unsafe, get off the road.
    · If safe to do so, contain any liquid leaking from the vehicle.
    · Keep bystanders away from the liquid and its fumes.
    · Do everything possible to prevent injury to yourself and to others.

246  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
9.7.5 ­ Required Notification

The National Response Center helps coordinate emergency response to chemical hazards. It is a
resource to the police and firefighters. It keeps a 24-hour toll-free line listed below. You or your
employer must phone when any of the following occur as a direct result of a hazardous materials
incident:

    · A person is killed.
    · An injured person requires hospitalization. Estimated property damage exceeds $50,000.
    · The general public is evacuated for more than one hour.
    · One or more major transportation arteries or facilities are closed for one hour or more.
    · Fire, breakage, spillage, or suspected radioactive contamination occurs.
    · Fire, breakage, spillage or suspected contamination occur involving shipment of infectious

         substance(s) (bacteria or toxins).
    · The release of a marine pollutant in a quantity more than 119 gallons for a liquid or 882

         pounds for a solid; or a situation exists of such a nature (e.g., continuing danger to life exists at
         the scene of an incident) that, in the judgment of the carrier, should be reported.

NATIONAL RESPONSE CENTER (800) 424-8802

When you call the National Response Center you should be ready to give:

    · Your name.
    · Name and address of the carrier you work for. Phone number where they can be reached.
    · Date, time, and location of incident. The extent of injuries, if any.
    · Classification, name, and quantity of hazardous materials involved, if the information is

         available.
    · Type of incident and nature of hazardous materials involvement and whether a continuing

         danger to life exists at the scene.
    · If a reportable quantity of hazardous substance was involved, the caller should give the name

         of the shipper and the quantity of the hazardous substance discharged.
    · Be prepared to give your employer the required information as well. Carriers must make

         detailed written reports within 30 days of an incident.

CHEMTREC (800) 424-9300

The Chemical Transportation Emergency Center (CHEMTREC) in Washington also has a 24-hour
toll-free line. CHEMTREC was created to provide emergency personnel with technical information
about the physical properties of hazardous materials. The National Response Center and
CHEMTREC are in close communication. If you call either one, they will tell the other about the
problem when appropriate.

247  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
Do not leave radioactive yellow - II or yellow - III labeled packages near people, animals, or film
longer than shown in Figure 9.10.

              Figure 9.10: Radioactive Separation Table

Total         Minimum          Minimum          Minimum          Minimum          Minimum          To People or
Transport     Distance in      Distance in      Distance in      Distance in      Distance in      Cargo
Index         Feet to Nearest  Feet to Nearest  Feet to Nearest  Feet to Nearest  Feet to Nearest  Compartment
              Undeveloped      Undeveloped      Undeveloped      Undeveloped      Undeveloped      Partitions
              Film:            Film:            Film:            Film:            Film:

              0-2 Hrs.         2-4 Hrs.         4-8 Hrs.         8-12 Hrs.        Over 12 Hrs.

     None     0                0                0                0                0                0

0.1 to 1.0    1                2                3                4                5                1

1.1 to 5.0    3                4                6                8                11               2

5.1 to 10.0   4                6                9                11               15               3

10.1 to 20.0  5                8                12               16               22               4

20.1 to 30.0  7                10               15               20               29               5

30.1 to 40.0  8                11               17               22               33               6

40.1 to 50.0  9                12               19               24               36               

CLASSES OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

Hazardous materials are categorized into nine major hazard classes and other categories for
consumer commodities and combustible liquids. The classes of hazardous materials are listed in
Figure 9.11.

248                                                                               Section 9: Hazardous Materials
            Figure 9.11: Hazard Class Definitions Table B

     Class  Class Name                                 Example
        1   Explosives                                 Ammunition, Dynamite, Fireworks
        2   Gases                                      Propane, Oxygen, Helium
        3   Flammable                                  Gasoline, Acetone
        4   Flammable Solids                           Matches, Fuses
        5   Oxidizers                                  Ammonium Nitrate, Hydrogen Peroxide
        6   Poisons                                    Pesticides, Arsenic
        7   Radioactive                                Uranium, Plutonium
        8   Corrosives                                 Hydrochloric Acid, Battery Fluid
        9   Miscellaneous Hazardous Materials          Formaldehyde, Asbestos
            ORM-D (Other Regulated Material-Domestic)  Hair Spray or Charcoal
     None   Combustible Liquids                        Fuel Oils, Lighter Fluid
     None

Subsections 9.6 and 9.7 Test Your Knowledge

    1. If your placarded trailer has dual tires, how often should you check the tires?
    2. What is a safe haven?
    3. How close to the traveled part of the roadway can you park with Division 1.2 or 1.3 materials?
    4. How close can you park to a bridge, tunnel, or building with Division 1.2 or 1.3 materials?
    5. What type of fire extinguisher do placarded vehicles need to carry?
    6. You're hauling 100 pounds of Division 4.3 materials. Do you need to stop before a railroad-

         highway crossing?
    7. At a rest area, you discover your hazardous materials shipments slowly leaking from the

         vehicle. There is no phone around. What should you do?
    8. What is the Emergency Response Guide (ERG)?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read subsections 9.6 and 9.7.

249                                                    Section 9: Hazardous Materials
9.8 ­ Hazardous Materials Glossary

This glossary has definitions of some terms used in this section. You can find a complete glossary of
terms for hazardous materials in the federal Hazardous Materials Rules (49 CFR 171.8). You should
keep an up-to-date copy of these rules for your reference.

You will not be tested on this glossary.

Bulk packaging ­ Packaging, other than a vessel, or a barge, including a transport vehicle or freight
container, in which hazardous materials are loaded with no intermediate form of containment, and
which has:

    · A maximum capacity more than 450 L (119 gallons) as a receptacle for a liquid;
    · A maximum net mass more than 400 kg (882 pounds) or a maximum capacity more than 450 L

         (119 gallons) as a receptacle for a solid; or
    · A water capacity more than 454 kg (1000 pounds) as a receptacle for a gas as defined in Sec.

         173.115.

Cargo tank - A bulk packaging which:

    · Is a tank intended primarily for the carriage of liquids or gases and includes appurtenances,
         reinforcements, fittings, and closures (for "tank", see 49 CFR 178.345-1(c), 49 CFR 178.337-1,
         or 49 CFR 178.338-1, as applicable);

    · Is permanently attached to or forms a part of a motor vehicle, or is not permanently attached to
         a motor vehicle but which, by reason of its size, construction, or attachment to a motor vehicle
         is loaded or unloaded without being removed from the motor vehicle; and

    · Is not fabricated under a specification for cylinders, portable tanks, tank cars, or multi-unit tank
         car tanks.

Carrier ­ A person who transports passengers or property in commerce by rail car, aircraft, motor
vehicle or vessel.

Consignee ­ The business or person to whom a shipment is delivered.

Division ­ A subdivision of a hazard class.

EPA ­ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

FMCSR ­ The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations.

Freight container ­ a reusable container having a volume of 64 cubic feet or more, designed and
constructed to permit being lifted with its contents intact and intended primarily for containment of
packages (in unit form) during transportation.

Fuel tank ­ A tank, other than a cargo tank, used to transport flammable or combustible liquid or
compressed gas for the purpose of supplying fuel for propulsion of the transport vehicle to which it is
attached, or for the operation of other equipment on the transport vehicle.

250  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
Gross weight or gross mass ­ The weight of the packaging plus the weight of its contents.

Hazard class ­ The category of hazard assigned to a hazardous material under the definitional
criteria of Part 173 and the provisions of the Sec. 172.101 Table. A material may meet the defining
criteria for more than one hazard class but is assigned to only one hazard class.

Hazardous materials ­ A substance or material which has been determined by the Secretary of
Transportation to be capable of posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety, and property when
transported in commerce, and which has been so designated. The term includes hazardous
substances, hazardous wastes, marine pollutants, elevated temperature materials and materials
designated as hazardous in the hazardous materials table of §172.101, and materials that meet the
defining criteria for hazard classes and divisions in §173, subchapter c of this chapter.

Hazardous substance - A material, including its mixtures and solutions, that:

    · Is listed in Appendix A to Sec. 172.101;

    · Is in a quantity, in one package, which equals or exceeds the reportable quantity (RQ) listed in
         Appendix A to Sec. 172.101; and

    · When in a mixture or solution -
             o For radionuclides, conforms to paragraph 7 of Appendix A to Sec. 172.101.
             o For other than radionuclides, is in a concentration by weight which equals or exceeds
                  the concentration corresponding to the RQ of the material, as shown in Figure 9.12.

     Figure 9.12: Hazardous Substance Concentrations

RQ Pounds (Kilograms)  Concentration by Weight:  Concentration by Weight:
                       Percent                   PPM
5,000 (2,270)          10                        100,000
1,000 (454)            2                         20,000
100 (45.4)             .2                        2,000
10 (4.54)              .02                       200
1 (0.454)              .002                      20

This definition does not apply to petroleum products that are lubricants or fuels (see 40 CFR 300.6).

Hazardous waste ­ Any material that is subject to the Hazardous Waste Manifest Requirements of
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency specified in 40 CFR Part 262.

251                                              Section 9: Hazardous Materials
Intermediate bulk container (IBC) ­ A rigid or flexible portable packaging, other than a cylinder or
portable tank, which is designed for mechanical handling. Standards for IBCs manufactured in the
United States are set forth in subparts N and O Part 178.

Limited quantity ­ The maximum amount of a hazardous material for which there may be specific
labeling or packaging exception.

Marking ­ The descriptive name, identification number, instructions, cautions, weight, specification,
or UN marks or combinations thereof, required by this subchapter on outer packaging of hazardous
materials.

Mixture ­ A material composed of more than one chemical compound or element.

Name of contents ­ The proper shipping name as specified in Sec. 172.101.

Non-bulk packaging ­ A packaging, which has:

    · A maximum capacity of 450 L (119 gallons) as a receptacle for a liquid;
    · A maximum net mass less than 400 kg (882 pounds) and a maximum capacity of 450 L (119

         gallons) or less as a receptacle for a solid;
    · A water capacity more than 454 kg (1,000 pounds) or less as a receptacle for a gas as defined

         in Sec. 173.115;
    · A maximum net mass of 400 kg (882 pounds) or less for a bag or box conforming to the

         applicable requirements for specification packaging, including the maximum net mass
         limitations, provided in subpart L of Part 178.

N.O.S. ­ Not otherwise specified.

Outage or ullage ­ The amount by which a packaging falls short of being liquid full, usually
expressed in percent by volume.

Portable tank ­ Bulk packaging (except a cylinder having a water capacity of 1,000 pounds or less)
designed primarily to be loaded onto, or on, or temporarily attached to a transport vehicle or ship and
equipped with skids, mountings, or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical
means. It does not include a cargo tank, tank car, multi-unit tank car tank, or trailer carrying 3AX,
3AAX, or 3T cylinders.

Proper shipping name ­ The name of the hazardous materials shown in Roman print (not italics) in
Sec. 172.101.

P.s.i. or psi ­ Pounds per square inch.

P.s.i.a. or psia ­ Pounds per square inch absolute.

Reportable quantity (RQ) ­ The quantity specified in Column 2 of the Appendix to Sec. 172.101 for
any material identified in Column 1 of the Appendix.

PHMSA ­ The Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, U.S. Department of
Transportation, Washington, DC 20590.

252  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
Shipper's certification ­ A statement on a shipping paper, signed by the shipper, saying he/she
prepared the shipment properly according to law. For example:

    · "This is to certify that the above named materials are properly classified, described, packaged,
         marked and labeled, and are in proper condition for transportation according to the applicable
         regulations or the Department of Transportation."; or

    · I hereby declare that the contents of this consignment are fully and accurately described above
         by the proper shipping name and are classified, packaged, marked and labeled/placarded, and
         are in all respects in proper condition for transport according to applicable international and
         national government regulations."

Shipping paper ­ A shipping order, bill of lading, manifest, or other shipping document serving a
similar purpose prepared following subpart C of Part 172.

Technical name ­ A recognized chemical name or microbiological name currently used in scientific
and technical handbooks, journals, and texts.

Transport vehicle ­ A cargo-carrying vehicle such as an automobile, van, tractor, truck, semi-trailer,
tank car, or rail car used for the transportation of cargo by any mode. Each cargo-carrying body
(trailer, rail car, etc.) is a separate transport vehicle.

UN standard packaging ­ A specification packaging conforming to the standards in the UN
recommendations.

UN ­ United Nations.

253  Section 9: Hazardous Materials
Section 10: School Buses

This Section Covers
    1. Danger Zones and Use of Mirrors
    2. Loading and Unloading
    3. Emergency Exit and Evacuation
    4. Railroad-highway Grade Crossings
    5. Student Management
    6. Antilock Braking Systems
    7. Special Safety Considerations

Because state and local laws regulate so much of school transportation and school bus operations,
many of the procedures in this section may be different in each state. You should be familiar with the
laws and regulations in your state and local school district.

10.1 ­ Danger Zones and Use of Mirrors

10.1.1 ­ Danger Zones

The danger zone is the area on all sides of the bus where children are in the most danger of being
hit by a vehicle, including their own bus.
The danger zones may extend as much as 30 feet from the front bumper with the first 10 feet being
the most dangerous. This includes 10 feet from the left and right sides of the bus and 10 feet behind
the rear bumper of the school bus.
The area to the left of the bus is dangerous because of passing cars. Figure 10.1 shows these danger
zones.

254  Section 10: School Buses
     Figure 10.1

10.1.2 ­ Correct Mirror Adjustment

Correct adjustment and use of all mirrors is vital to the safe operation of the school bus in order to
observe the danger zone around the bus and look for students, traffic, and other objects in this area.
You should always check each mirror before operating the school bus to have the largest viewing
area. If needed, have the mirrors adjusted.

10.1.3 ­ Outside Left and Right Side Flat Mirrors

These mirrors are mounted at the left and right front corners of the bus at the side or front of the
windshield.

    · They are used to monitor traffic, check clearances and students on the sides and to the rear of
         the bus.

255               Section 10: School Buses
    · There is a blind spot immediately below and in front of each mirror and directly behind the rear
         bumper.

    · The blind spot behind the bus extends 50 to 150 feet and could extend up to 400 feet
         depending on the length and width of the bus.

Ensure the mirrors are properly adjusted so you can see:

    · 200 feet or 4 bus lengths behind the bus. Along the sides of the bus.
    · The rear tires are touching the ground.

Figure 10.2 shows how both the outside left and right-side flat mirrors should be adjusted.

     Figure 10.2

10.1.4 ­ Outside Left and Right Side Convex Mirrors

The convex mirrors are located below the outside flat mirrors. They are used to monitor the left and
right sides at a wide angle. These mirrors give a view of people and objects that does not accurately
reflect their size and distance from the bus. They provide a view of:

    · traffic
    · clearances
    · and students at the side of the bus.

256               Section 10: School Buses
You should position these mirrors to see:

    · The entire side of the bus up to the mirror mounts.
    · Front of the rear tires touching the ground.
    · At least one traffic lane on either side of the bus.
Figure 10.3 shows how both the outside left and right side convex mirrors should be adjusted.

     Figure 10.3

10.1.5 ­ Outside Left and Right Side Crossover Mirrors

These mirrors are mounted on both the left and right front corners of the bus. They are used to see:

    · The front bumper "danger zone" area directly in front of the bus that is not visible by direct
         vision

    · The "danger zone" area to the left side and the right side of the bus
             o Including the service door
             o Front wheel area.

The mirror presents a view of people and objects that does not accurately reflect their size and
distance from the bus. The driver must ensure that these mirrors are properly adjusted.

257               Section 10: School Buses
Ensure that the mirrors are properly adjusted so you can see:

    · The entire area in front of the bus from the front bumper at ground level to a point where direct
         vision is possible. Direct vision and mirror view vision should overlap.

    · The right and left front tires touching the ground.
    · The area from the front of the bus to the service door.

These mirrors, along with the convex and flat mirrors, should be viewed in an order that makes the
most safety sense for the situation to ensure that a child or object is not in any of the danger zones.

Figure 10.4 illustrates how the left and right side crossover mirrors should be adjusted.

                                                            Figure 10.4

10.1.6 ­ Overhead Inside Rearview Mirror

This mirror is mounted directly above the windshield on the driver's side area of the bus. This mirror is
used to monitor passenger activity inside the bus. It may provide limited visibility directly in back of
the bus if the bus is equipped with a glass-bottomed rear emergency door.

258  Section 10: School Buses
There is a blind spot area directly behind the driver's seat as well as a large blind spot area that
begins at the rear bumper and could extend up to 400 feet or more behind the bus. You must use the
exterior side mirrors to monitor traffic that approaches and enters this area.

You should position the mirror to see:

    · The top of the rear window in the top of the mirror.
    · All of the students, including the heads of the students right behind you.

10.2 ­ Loading and Unloading

Each year, more students are killed while getting on or off a school bus than are killed as passengers
inside of a school bus. It is critical to know what to do before, during, and after loading or unloading
students. This section will give you specific procedures to follow to keep safe. Following these steps
will help you avoid injuries and fatalities during and after loading and unloading students.

The information in this section is intended to provide a broad overview but is not a definitive set of
actions. It is important that you learn and obey the state laws and regulations about loading and
unloading operations in your state.

10.2.1 ­ Approaching the Stop

Each school district makes official routes and official school bus stops. All stops should be approved
by the school district before making the stop. You should never change the location of a bus stop
without written approval from the school district.

You must use extreme caution when approaching a school bus stop. You are in a very demanding
situation when entering these areas. It is critical that you understand and follow all state and local
laws and regulations about approaching a school bus stop. This involves the proper use of mirrors,
alternating flashing lights, and when equipped, the moveable stop signal arm and crossing control
arm.

When approaching the stop, you should:

    · Approach cautiously at a slow speed.
    · Look for pedestrians, traffic, or other objects before, during, and after coming to a stop.
    · Continuously check all mirrors.
    · If the school bus has them equipped, activate alternating flashing amber warning lights at least

         200 feet or approximately 5-10 seconds before the school bus stop or following state law.
    · Turn on the right turn signal indicator about 100-300 feet or approximately 3-5 seconds before

         pulling over.
    · Continuously check mirrors to watch the danger zones for students, traffic, and other objects.

259  Section 10: School Buses
    · Move as far as possible to the right on the traveled portion of the roadway.

When stopping you should:

    · Bring the school bus to a full stop with the front bumper at least 10 feet away from students at
         the designated stop. This forces the students to walk to the bus so you have a better view of
         their movements.

    · Place transmission in Park, or if there is no Park shift point, in Neutral and set the parking
         brake at each stop.

    · Activate alternating red lights when traffic is a safe distance from the school bus and ensure
         the stop arm is extended.

    · Make a final check to see that all traffic has stopped before completely opening the door and
         signaling students to approach.

10.2.2 ­ Loading Procedures

Perform a safe stop as described in subsection 10.2.1.

Students should wait in a designated location for the school bus, facing the bus as it approaches.

Students should board the bus only when signaled by the driver.

Monitor all mirrors continuously.

Count the number of students at the bus stop and be sure they all board the bus. It is helpful to know
the names of students at each stop. If there is a student missing, ask the other students where the
student is.

Have the students board the school bus slowly, in single file, and use the handrail. The dome light
should be on while loading in the dark.

Wait until students are seated and facing forward before moving the bus.

Check all mirrors. Make certain no one is running to catch the bus.

If you cannot account for a student outside, secure the bus, take the key, and check around and
underneath the bus.

When all students are accounted for, prepare to leave by:

    · Closing the door. Engaging the transmission.
    · Releasing the parking brake.
    · Turning off alternating flashing red lights. Turning on the left turn signal.
    · Checking all mirrors again.
    · Allowing congested traffic to disperse.
    · When it is safe, move the bus to enter traffic flow and continue the route.

260  Section 10: School Buses
The loading procedure is essentially the same wherever you load students, but there are slight
differences. When students are loading at the school campus, you should:

    · Turn off the ignition switch.
    · Remove the key if you are leaving the driver's compartment.
Position yourself to supervise loading as required or recommended by your state or local regulations.

10.2.3 ­ Unloading Procedures on the Route

Perform a safe stop at designated unloading areas as described in subsection 10.2.1.
Have the students remain seated until told to exit. Check all mirrors.
Count the number of students while unloading to confirm the location of all students before pulling
away from the stop.
Tell students to exit the bus and walk at least 10 feet away from the side of the bus to a position
where the driver can plainly see all students.
Check all mirrors again. Make sure no students are around or returning to the bus.
If you cannot account for a student outside the bus, secure the bus, and check around and
underneath the bus.
When all students are accounted for, prepare to leave by:

    · Closing the door. Engaging transmission. Releasing parking brake.
    · Turning off alternating flashing red lights. Turning on left turn signal.
    · Checking all mirrors again.
    · Allowing congested traffic to disperse.
    · When it is safe, move the bus, enter the traffic flow and continue the route.

   NOTE: If you have missed a student's unloading stop, do not back up. Be sure to follow
   local procedures.

ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES FOR STUDENTS THAT MUST CROSS THE ROADWAY
You should understand what students should do when exiting a school bus and crossing the street in
front of the bus. In addition, the school bus driver should understand that students might not always
do what they are supposed to do.
If a student or students must cross the roadway, they should follow these procedures:

261  Section 10: School Buses
    · Walk approximately 10 feet away from the side of the school bus to a position where you can
         see them.

    · Walk to a location at least 10 feet in front of the right corner of the bumper, keeping away from
         the front of the school bus.

    · Stop at the right edge of the roadway.
    · You should be able to see the student's feet.

When students reach the edge of the roadway, they should:

    · Stop and look in all directions, making sure the roadway is clear and is safe.
    · Check to see if the red flashing lights on the bus are still flashing.
    · Wait for your signal before crossing the roadway.

Upon your signal, the students should:

    · Cross far enough in front of the school bus to be in your view.
    · Stop at the left edge of the school bus, stop, and look again for your signal to continue to cross

         the roadway.
    · Look for traffic in both directions, making sure the roadway is clear.
    · Proceed across the roadway, continuing to look in all directions.

   NOTE: The school bus driver should enforce any state or local regulations or
   recommendations concerning student actions outside the school bus.

10.2.4 ­ Unloading Procedures at School

State and local laws about unloading students at schools, particularly in the school parking lot or a
location off the traveled roadway, are often different from unloading along the school bus route. It is
important that you understand and follow state and local laws and regulations. The following
procedures are meant to be general guidelines.

When unloading at the school you should:

    · Perform a safe stop at designated unloading areas as described in subsection 10.2.1.
    · Secure the bus by:

             o Turning off the ignition switch.
             o Removing key if leaving driver's compartment. Have the students remain seated until

                  told to exit.
    · Position yourself to supervise unloading as required or recommended by your state or local

         regulations.

262  Section 10: School Buses
             o Have students exit in orderly fashion.
             o Observe students as they step from the bus to see they all move promptly away from

                  the unloading area.
             o Walk through the bus and check for hiding/sleeping students and items left by students.
             o Check all mirrors. Make certain no students are returning to the bus.
             o If you cannot account for a student outside the bus and the bus is secure, check around

                  and underneath the bus.

When all students are accounted for, prepare to leave by:

    · Closing the door. Fastening safety belt. Starting engine.
    · Engaging the transmission. Releasing the parking brake.
    · Turning off alternating flashing red lights. Turning on the left turn signal.
    · Checking all mirrors again.
    · Allowing congested traffic to disperse.
    · When it is safe, pull away from the unloading area.

10.2.5 ­ Special Dangers of Loading and Unloading

DROPPED OR FORGOTTEN OBJECTS
Always focus on students as they approach the bus and watch for any who disappear from sight.
Students may drop an object near the bus during loading and unloading. Stopping or returning to pick
up the object may cause the student to disappear from the driver's sight at a very dangerous moment.
Students should be told to leave any dropped object and move to a point of safety out of the danger
zones before trying to get the driver's attention to retrieve the object.

HANDRAIL HANG-UPS
Students have been injured or killed when clothing, accessories, or even parts of their body get
caught in the handrail or door as they exited the bus. You should closely observe all students exiting
the bus to confirm that they are in a safe location prior to moving the bus

10.2.6 ­ Post-trip Inspection

When your route or school activity trip is finished, you should conduct a post-trip inspection of the
bus.
You should walk through the bus and around the bus looking for the following:

263  Section 10: School Buses
    · Articles left on the bus. Sleeping students.
    · Open windows and doors.
    · Mechanical/operational problems with the bus,

             o Give special attention to items that are unique to school buses like mirror systems,
                  flashing warning lamps, and stop signal arms.

    · Damage or vandalism.

Any problems or special situations should be reported immediately to your supervisor or
school authorities.

10.3 ­ Emergency Exit and Evacuation

An emergency can happen to anyone, anytime, anywhere. It could be a crash, a stalled school bus
on a railroad-highway crossing or in a high-speed intersection, an electrical fire in the engine
compartment, a medical emergency to a student on the school bus, etc. Emergencies may cause you
to evacuate the bus to keep everyone safe. Knowing what to do before, during, and after an
emergency evacuation can mean the difference between life and death.

10.3.1 ­ Planning for Emergencies

DECIDE WHEN YOU NEED TO EVACUATE THE BUS

The most important consideration for deciding to evacuate the bus is to recognize the hazard. If you
have enough time, you should contact your dispatcher to explain the situation before deciding to
evacuate the school bus.

Keeping students on the bus during an emergency is the best way to ensure their safety. However, if
keeping students on the bus would put them in unnecessary risk of injury, you should evacuate the
bus. Remember, the decision to evacuate the bus must be made quickly

When deciding if you should evacuate, ask yourself the following questions:

    · Is there a fire or danger of fire?
    · Is there a smell of raw or leaking fuel?
    · Is there a chance the bus could be hit by other vehicles?
    · Is the bus in the path of a sighted tornado or rising waters?
    · Are there downed power lines?
    · Would removing students expose them to speeding traffic, severe weather, or a dangerous

         environment such as downed power lines?

264  Section 10: School Buses
    · Would moving students complicate injuries such as neck and back injuries and fractures?
    · Is there a hazardous spill involved? Sometimes, it may be safer to remain on the bus and not

         come in contact with the material.

MANDATORY EVACUATIONS
You must evacuate the bus when:

    · The bus is on fire or there is a threat of a fire.
    · The bus is stalled on or adjacent to a railroad-highway crossing.
    · The position of the bus may change and increase the danger.
    · There is an imminent danger of collision.
    · There is a hazardous materials spill.

10.3.2 ­ Evacuation Procedures

BE PREPARED AND PLAN AHEAD

You must explain the emergency evacuation procedures to all students. This includes knowing how to
operate the various emergency exits and the importance of listening to and following all instructions
given by you.

If you have older students who are responsible, you can assign them to be assistants at each
emergency exit. Teach them how to help the other students off the bus. Assign another student
assistant to lead the students to a safe place after evacuation.

Some tips to help find a safe place:

    · A safe place will be at least 100 feet off the road in the direction of oncoming traffic. This will
         keep the students from being hit by debris if another vehicle collides with the bus.

    · Lead students upwind of the bus if fire is present.
    · Lead students as far away from railroad tracks as possible and in the direction of any

         oncoming train.
    · Lead students upwind of the bus at least 300 feet if there is a risk from spilled hazardous

         materials.
    · If the bus is in the direct path of a sighted tornado and evacuation is ordered:

             o Escort students to a nearby ditch or culvert if shelter in a building is not readily
                  available,

             o Direct them to lie face down, hands covering their head.
             o They should be far enough away so the bus cannot topple on them.
    · Avoid areas that are subject to flash floods.

265  Section 10: School Buses
GENERAL PROCEDURES

Decide if evacuation is in the best interest of safety.

Decide the best type of evacuation:

    · Front, rear or side door evacuation, or some combination of doors.
    · Roof or window evacuation.
    · Secure the bus by:

             o Placing transmission in Park, or if there is no shift point, in Neutral.
             o Setting parking brakes. Shutting off the engine. Removing ignition key.
             o Activating hazard-warning lights.
    · If time allows, notify dispatch office of evacuation location, conditions, and type of assistance
         needed.
    · Dangle radio microphone or telephone out of driver's window for later use, if operable.
    · If no radio, or radio is inoperable, dispatch a passing motorist or area resident to call for help.
         As a last resort, dispatch two older, responsible students to go for help.
    · Order the evacuation.
    · Evacuate students from the bus.

Do not move a student you believe may have suffered a neck or spinal injury unless his or her life is
in immediate danger.

Special procedures must be used to move neck spinal injury victims to prevent further injury.

    · Direct a student assistant to lead students to the nearest safe place.
    · Walk through the bus to ensure no students remain on the bus.
    · Retrieve emergency equipment.
    · Join waiting students.
    · Account for all students and check for their safety.
    · Protect the scene. Set out emergency warning devices as necessary and appropriate.
    · Prepare information for emergency responders.

266  Section 10: School Buses
10.4 ­ Railroad-highway Crossings

10.4.1 ­ Types of Crossings

PASSIVE CROSSINGS
Passive crossings have yellow circular advance warning signs, pavement markings and cross-bucks
to assist you in recognizing a crossing. This type of crossing does not have any type of traffic control
device. You must stop at these crossings and follow proper procedures. However, the decision to
proceed is entirely yours. Passive crossings require you to:

    · Recognize the crossing.
    · Search for any train using the tracks
    · Decide if there is sufficient clear space to cross safely.

ACTIVE CROSSINGS
This type of crossing has a traffic control device installed at the crossing to regulate traffic at the
crossing. These active devices include flashing red lights, with or without bells and flashing red lights
with bells and gates.

10.4.2 ­ Warning Signs and Devices

ADVANCE WARNING SIGNS
The round, black-on- yellow warning sign is placed ahead of a public railroad-highway crossing. The
advance warning sign tells you to slow down, look and listen for the train, and be prepared to stop at
the tracks if a train is coming. See Figure 10.5.

     Figure 10.5

267               Section 10: School Buses
PAVEMENT MARKINGS
Pavement markings mean the same as the advance warning sign. They look like an "X" with the
letters "RR" and a no-passing marking on two-lane roads.
There is also a no passing zone sign on two-lane roads. There may be a white stop line painted on
the pavement before the railroad tracks. The front of the school bus must remain behind this line
while stopped at the crossing. See Figure 10.6.

                                                            Figure 10.6

CROSS-BUCK SIGNS
This sign marks the crossing. It requires you to yield the right-of-way to the train. If there is no white
line painted on the pavement, you must stop the bus before the cross-buck sign. When the road
crosses over more than one set of tracks, a sign below the cross-buck indicates the number of tracks.
See Figure 10.7.

     Figure 10.7

268               Section 10: School Buses
FLASHING RED LIGHT SIGNALS

At many highway-rail grade crossings, the cross-buck sign has flashing red lights and bells. When the
lights begin to flash, stop! A train is approaching. You must yield the right-of-way to the train. If there
is more than one track, make sure all tracks are clear before crossing. See Figure 10.8.

GATES

Many railroad-highway crossings have gates with flashing red lights and bells. Stop when the lights
begin to flash and before the gate lowers across the road lane. Remain stopped until the gates go up
and the lights have stopped flashing. Proceed when it is safe. If the gate stays down after the train
passes, do not drive around the gate. Instead, call your dispatcher. See Figure 10.8.

10.4.3 ­ Recommended Procedures

Each state has laws governing how school buses must operate at railroad-highway crossings. It is
important for you to understand and obey these state laws and regulations. In general, school buses
must stop at all crossings and make sure it is safe before crossing the tracks. The specific procedures
needed in each state vary.

                                                            Figure 10.8

A school bus is one of the safest vehicles on the highway. However, a school bus does not have the
slightest edge when involved in a crash with a train. Because of a train's size and weight, it cannot
stop quickly. An emergency escape route does not exist for a train. You can prevent crashes by
following these recommended procedures.

269  Section 10: School Buses
APPROACHING THE CROSSING
    · Slow down, including shifting to a lower gear in a manual transmission bus, and test your
         brakes.
    · Activate hazard lights approximately 200 feet before the crossing. Make sure your intentions
         are known.
    · Scan your surroundings and check for traffic behind you.
    · Stay to the right of the roadway if possible.
    · Choose an escape route in case of a brake failure or problems behind you.

AT THE CROSSING
    · Stop no closer than 15 feet and no farther than 50 feet from the nearest rail, where you have
         the best view of the tracks.
    · Place the transmission in Park, or if there is no Park shift point, in Neutral and press down on
         the service brake or set the parking brakes.
    · Turn off all radios and noisy equipment and silence the passengers.
    · Open the service door and driver's window. Look and listen for an approaching train.

CROSSING THE TRACK
    · Check the crossing signals again before continuing.
    · At a multiple-track crossing, stop only before the first set of tracks. When you are sure no train
         is approaching on any track, continue across all the tracks until you have completely cleared
         them.
    · Cross the tracks in a low gear. Do not change gears while crossing.
    · If the gate comes down after you have started across, drive through it even if it means you will
         break the gate.

10.4.4 ­ Special Situations

BUS STALLS OR TRAPPED ON TRACKS

If your bus stalls or is trapped on the tracks, get everyone out and off the tracks immediately. Move
everyone far from the bus at an angle, which is both away from the tracks and toward the train.

POLICE OFFICER AT THE CROSSING

If a police officer is at the crossing, obey directions. If there is no police officer, and you believe the
signal is malfunctioning, call your dispatcher to report the situation and ask for instructions on how to
continue.

270  Section 10: School Buses
OBSTRUCTED VIEW OF TRACKS

Plan your route so it provides maximum sight distance at highway-rail grade crossings. Do not
attempt to cross the tracks unless you can see far enough down the track to know for certain that no
trains are approaching. Passive crossings are those that do not have any type of traffic control
device. Be especially careful at "passive" crossings. Even if there are active railroad signals that
indicate the tracks are clear, you must look and listen to be sure it is safe to proceed.

CONTAINMENT OR STORAGE AREAS

If it won't fit, don't commit! Know the length of your bus and the size of the containment area at
highway-rail crossings on the school bus route, as well as any crossing you encounter during a
school activity trip. When approaching a crossing with a signal or stop sign on the opposite side, pay
attention to the amount of room there. Be sure the bus has enough containment or storage area to
completely clear the railroad tracks on the other side if you need to stop. Generally, add 15 feet to the
length of the school bus to determine an acceptable amount of containment or storage area.

10.5 ­ Student Management

10.5.1 ­ Don't Deal With On-bus Problems When Loading and Unloading

To get students to and from school safely and on time, you need to be able to concentrate on the
driving task.

Loading and unloading requires all your concentration. Don't take your eyes off what is happening
outside the bus.

If there is a behavior problem on the bus, wait until the students unloading are safely off the bus and
have moved away. If necessary, pull the bus over to handle the problem.

10.5.2 ­ Handling Serious Problems

Tips on handling serious problems:

    · Follow your school's procedures for discipline or refusal of rights to ride the bus.
    · Stop the bus. Park in a safe location off the road, perhaps a parking lot or a driveway.
    · Secure the bus. Take the ignition key with you if you leave your seat.
    · Stand up and speak respectfully to the offender or offenders. Speak in a courteous manner

         with a firm voice. Remind the offender of the expected behavior. Do not show anger but do
         show that you mean business.
    · If a change of seating is needed, request that the student move to a seat near you.

271                        Section 10: School Buses
     · Never put a student off the bus except at school or at his or her designated school bus stop. If
         you feel that the offense is serious enough that you cannot safely drive the bus, call for a
         school administrator or the police to come and remove the student.

     · Always follow your state or local procedures for requesting help.

10.6 ­ Antilock Braking Systems

10.6.1 ­ Vehicles Required to Have Antilock Braking Systems

The Department of Transportation requires that antilock braking systems be on:

    · Air brakes vehicles, (trucks, buses, trailers and converter dollies) built on or after March 1,
         1998.

    · Hydraulically braked trucks and buses with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 lbs or more
         built on or after March 1, 1999.

Many buses built before these dates have been voluntarily equipped with ABS.

Your school bus will have a yellow ABS malfunction lamp on the instrument panel if it is equipped
with ABS.

10.6.2 ­ How ABS Helps You

When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up. When
your steering wheels lock up, you lose steering control. When your other wheels lock up, you may
skid or even spin the vehicle.

ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up and keep control. You may or may not be able to stop faster with
ABS, but you should be able to steer around an obstacle while braking, and avoid skids caused by
over braking.

10.6.3 ­ Braking with ABS

When you drive a vehicle with ABS, you should brake as you always have. In other words:

Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely and stay in control.

Brake the same way, regardless of whether you have ABS on the bus. However, in emergency
braking, do not pump the brakes on a bus with ABS.

As you slow down, monitor your bus and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to stay in control.

272                              Section 10: School Buses
10.6.4 ­ Braking if ABS is Not Working

Without ABS, you still have normal brake functions. Drive and brake as you always have.

Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps to tell you if something is not working. The yellow
ABS malfunction lamp is on the bus's instrument panel. As a system check on newer vehicles, the
malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb check and then goes out quickly. On older systems,
the lamp could stay on until you are driving over five mph.

If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes on once you are underway, you may have lost ABS
control at one or more wheels.

Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still have regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the
system serviced soon.

10.6.5 ­ Safety Reminders

ABS won't allow you to drive faster, follow more closely, or drive less carefully.

ABS won't prevent power or turning skids. ABS should prevent brake-induced skids but not those
caused by spinning the drive wheels or going too fast in a turn.

ABS won't necessarily shorten stopping distance. ABS will help maintain vehicle control, but not
always shorten stopping distance.

ABS won't increase or decrease ultimate stopping power. ABS is an "add-on" to your normal
brakes, not a replacement for them.

ABS won't change the way you normally brake. Under normal brake conditions, your vehicle will
stop as it always stopped. ABS only comes into play when a wheel would normally have locked up
because of over braking.

ABS won't compensate for bad brakes or poor brake maintenance.

   Remember: The best vehicle safety feature is still a safe driver.

   Remember: Drive so you never need to use your ABS.

   Remember: If you need it, ABS could help to prevent a serious crash.

273  Section 10: School Buses
10.7 ­ Special Safety Considerations

10.7.1 ­ Strobe Lights

Some school buses are equipped with roof-mounted, white strobe lights. If your bus has one, the
overhead strobe light should be used when you have limited visibility. This means that you cannot
easily see around you in front of, behind, or beside the school bus. Your visibility could only be
slightly limited or it could be so bad you can see nothing at all. Understand and obey your state or
local regulations concerning the use of these lights.

10.7.2 ­ Driving in High Winds

Strong winds affect the handling of the school bus! The side of a school bus acts like a sail on a
sailboat. Strong winds can push the school bus sideways. They can even move the school bus off the
road or, in extreme conditions, tip it over.

If you are caught in strong winds:

    · Keep a strong grip on the steering wheel. Try to anticipate gusts.
    · You should slow down to lessen the effect of the wind or pull off the roadway and wait.
    · Contact your dispatcher to get more information on how to continue.

10.7.3 ­ Backing

It is very dangerous to back a school bus. You should only back your bus when you have no other
safe way to move the vehicle. You should never back-up a school bus when students are outside of
the bus. Backing increases your risk of a collision. If you have no choice and you must back your bus,
follow these procedures:

    · Assign a passenger to act as a lookout. The job of the lookout is to warn you about any
         obstacles, people approaching, and other vehicles. The lookout should not give directions on
         how to back the bus.

    · Signal for quiet on the bus.
    · Constantly check all mirrors and rear windows. Back slowly and smoothly.

If there is no one to be a lookout:

    · Set the parking brake.
    · Turn off the motor and take the keys with you.
    · Walk to the rear of the bus to decide if the way is clear.

274                                   Section 10: School Buses
    · If you must back-up at a student pick-up point:
             o Always be on the watch for students getting to the stop late.
             o Be sure to pick up students before backing.
             o Be sure that all students are in the bus before backing.

    · If you must back-up at a student drop-off point, be sure to unload students after backing.

10.7.4 ­ Tail Swing

A school bus can have up to a three-foot tail swing. You need to check your mirrors before and during
any turning movements to watch the tail swing.

Section 10 Test Your Knowledge

    1. Define the danger zone.
    2. How far does the danger zone extend around the bus?
    3. What should you be able to see if the outside flat mirrors are adjusted properly?
    4. What should you be able to see if the outside convex mirrors are adjusted properly?
    5. What should you be able to see if the crossover mirrors are adjusted properly?
    6. You are loading students along the route. When should you activate your alternating flashing

         amber warning lights?
    7. You are unloading students along your route. Where should students walk to after exiting the

         bus?
    8. After unloading at school, why should you walk through the bus?
    9. What position should students be in front of the bus before they cross the roadway?
    10. Under what conditions must you evacuate the bus?
    11. How far from the nearest rail should you stop at a highway-rail crossing?
    12. What is a passive highway-rail crossing?
    13. Why should you be extra cautious at a passive highway-rail crossing?
    14. How should you use your brakes if your vehicle is equipped with antilock brakes (ABS)?
These questions may be on your test. If you can't answer them all, re-read Section 10.

275  Section 10: School Buses
Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test

This Section Covers:

    1. Internal Inspections (All Vehicles)
    2. Passenger Vehicle Inspections
    3. School Bus Vehicle Inspections
    4. Lights Operations Check (All Vehicles)
    5. External Inspections (All Vehicles)
    6. Combination Vehicle Inspections

Federal and jurisdictional laws require CDL drivers to inspect their vehicle to find out if it's safe to
drive. A vehicle inspection will help you find problems that can cause a breakdown or, even worse, a
crash. It is important to inspect all parts of your vehicle to be sure they are working properly.

To get your CDL, you must take and pass a CDL Vehicle Inspection test. The test will focus on the
items which are the most important for operating your vehicle safely. During your CDL Vehicle
Inspection test:

    · You must show you have the knowledge to find out if the vehicle is safe to drive
    · You will only be asked to inspect one vehicle axle; however, you should be prepared to

         perform the same inspection described in subsection 11.5.2 on all of the vehicle axles.

The vehicle inspection test does not cover all the federal inspection guidelines. It is your responsibility
to know the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations.

For safety, you should use wheel chocks during the Vehicle Inspection test. You will have to
walk around, enter, and exit the vehicle as part of the inspection. When you exit the vehicle, you must
set the parking brake(s) and place the vehicle in neutral.

When you enter or exit the vehicle, you must face the vehicle and always keep three (3) points of
contact. When you enter or exit a bus, face forward and keep a firm grasp on the handrail.

You only need to inspect the items on the CDL Vehicle Inspection checklist. You may use the
checklist at the end of this section for your test and check off items as you have completed them, but
NO other markings or writing may be placed on this list prior to the test.

You MUST name, point to, or touch, and fully explain to the examiner WHAT you are inspecting each
item for. If you do not, you will not get credit for the item(s). You will NOT have to crawl under the
vehicle. Any vehicle that has components marked or labeled, other than by the manufacturer,
CANNOT be used for the Vehicle Inspection test.

276  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
Failure to Follow Instructions or Unsafe Act

If you do not follow your examiner's instructions for completing the test, it may result in an automatic
failure, and the test may be ended by the examiner. Always follow the examiner's instructions and
directions. If you do not understand the instructions, ask the examiner for clarification.

If you commit an "unsafe act" like forgetting to set the parking brake, the examiner may give you an
automatic failure and end the test. Safety of the driver, the examiner, and the testing area is of the
highest priority. Always think about safety.

11.1 ­ Internal Inspection (All Vehicles)

Study the following parts for the vehicle you will be using during the CDL Vehicle Inspection test. You
should be able to identify each part and tell the examiner what you are looking for or inspecting.

11.1.1 ­ In-Vehicle/Engine Start

LIGHTING INDICATORS
Description: Dashboard indicator lights for signals, flashers, headlight high beam; Anti-lock Braking
System (ABS); and Diesel Exhaust Fluid (DEF)/Diesel Particulate Filter (DPF).
Why Inspect: Shows which functions are active or warns of problem vehicle components.
What and How to Inspect: Each of the following items must be inspected. Inspect to make sure the
dash indicators work when the vehicle starts and when corresponding lights are turned on including:

    · Left turn signal indicator.
    · Right turn signal indicator.
    · Four-way emergency indicator.
    · High beam headlight indicator.
    · ABS indicator on dashboard;

             o For combination vehicles only: the rear driver's side trailer ABS light should turn on then
                  off, if equipped.

    · DEF indicator, if equipped.

   NOTE: Operational inspection of actual turn signals, four-way indicators and high beam
   functions must be done separately during the lights' operation inspection described in
   Section 11.4.

277  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT

Description: Required emergency equipment.

Why Inspect: Emergency equipment must be available and in usable condition.

What and How to Inspect:

    · Inspect for spare electrical fuses (if used) or identify circuit breakers.
    · NOTE: If the vehicle is not equipped with electrical fuses, you must mention this to the

         examiner and identify that the vehicle runs on circuit breakers.
    · Inspect for a properly charged and secured fire extinguisher.
    · Inspect for three (3) red reflective triangles, six (6) fuse flares, or three (3) liquid burning flares.

WINDSHIELD AND TRAFFIC MONITORING DEVICES

Description: Windshield, mirrors, and other monitoring devices, such as cameras.

Why Inspect: Cracks, obstructions, stickers, or dirt in the driver's viewing area can cause the driver
to lose sight of changes in road conditions or other traffic around the vehicle.

What and How to Inspect:

    · Inspect that the windshield is clean with no obstructions except for an inspection sticker. There
         can be no damage, such as cracks or flaws to the glass.

    · Inspect that any mirrors are clean and adjusted properly from the inside
    · If your vehicle has external cameras inspect that rear and side view monitoring devices are

         clean and in working condition. You should be able to see the feed from the devices inside the
         cab. The video display must be working and adjusted so you can see the screen.

WIPERS/WASHERS

Description: Windshield wipers and washers.

Why Inspect: Wipers improve visibility during rain and snow. Worn blades reduce visibility. Washers
assist in keeping the windshield clean.

What and How to Inspect:

    · Inspect that wiper arms and blades are secure, not damaged, and show wipers work smoothly
         by turning them on and off.

    · Inspect for windshield washer fluid and show windshield washers work correctly by activating
         the washers.

278  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
HEATER/DEFROSTER

Description: Heats the cab or passenger compartment and keeps frost or condensation from forming
on the windshield.

Why Inspect: The defroster improves visibility, especially during cold weather.

What and How to Inspect: Identify, describe, and show the heater(s) and defroster(s) work correctly
by using the controls.

HORN(S)

Description: Air and/or electrical horns used for warning other roadway users (e.g., cars,
motorcyclists, bicyclists, and pedestrians).

Why Inspect: The horn is a device that must function properly to warn other roadway users of your
presence and avoid potential collisions.

How To Inspect: Inspect that the air horn and/or electric horn work.

PARKING AND TRAILER BRAKE CHECK

Description: Keeps vehicle from moving or rolling when parked.

Why Inspect: The parking brake(s) must function when a vehicle is parked, especially when on a
grade. A vehicle allowed to roll could cause damage or injury to other roadway users or property.

How To Inspect: You must show the parking brake check (and trailer parking brake check, if
equipped). This procedure is designed to decide that the parking brake(s) are working correctly, and
they keep the vehicle from moving.

    · Parking Brake: With the parking brake engaged, remove your foot from the service brake and
         inspect that the parking brake will hold the vehicle by gently pulling forward with the parking
         brake on. If you have a combination vehicle, make sure you release the trailer brakes.

    · Trailer Brake: With the parking brake released and the trailer parking brake engaged for
         combination vehicles only, remove your foot from the service brake and inspect that the trailer
         parking brake will hold the vehicle by gently pulling forward with the trailer parking brake on.
         Also helps in checking the coupling connection with the trailer.

SERVICE BRAKE CHECK

Description: Procedure to be followed to inspect the application of air, hydraulic or electric service
brakes.

Why Inspect: This procedure is designed to make certain that air, hydraulic or electric service brakes
are operating correctly for normal operation.

279  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
How To Inspect: You will have to show the application of air, hydraulic or electric service brakes.
This procedure is designed to decide that the brakes are working correctly, and that the vehicle does
not pull to one side or the other at a low speed.

Pull forward at 5 mph, apply the service (foot) brake and come to a complete stop. Inspect to see that
the vehicle does not pull to either side and stops when the service brake is applied. If the vehicle pulls
to either side or does not stop well, the brakes may not be working correctly.

11.1.2 ­ Air Brake or Hydraulic Brake Check
(based on type of brake system)

AIR BRAKE CHECK (AIR BRAKE EQUIPPED VEHICLES ONLY)

Description: Some vehicles have air brakes and these are the procedures to be followed in
inspecting air brake systems.

Why Inspect: Air brake safety devices vary. This procedure is designed to make certain that safety
devices are working correctly as air pressure drops from "normal" to "low air" conditions. Loss of air
pressure will cause the emergency brakes to activate causing an abrupt and uncontrolled stop.

How To Inspect: Failure to explain and show all four (4) parts of the air brake check will result in an
automatic failure of the CDL Vehicle Inspection test.

The proper procedures for inspecting the air brake system are as follows:

    1. Air Gauge and Governor Cutout Check
             · Chock the wheels, if needed.
             · Start the vehicle and inspect that the air gauge(s) is working.

    2. Build the air pressure to governor cutout and identify the range of activation. This will happen
         at about 120 ­ 140 psi OR the level specified by the manufacturer.

    3. Air Leakage Rate Test
    4. Shut off the engine, return the key to the "on" or "battery charge" position, release the parking

         brake and the tractor protection valve if you are using a combination vehicle.
             · Fully apply the foot brake.
             · Once the air gauge is stabilized after the first drop from applying the brakes, hold the
                  foot brake for one (1) minute.
             · Inspect the air gauge to see if the air pressure drops no more than:
                          Three (3) pounds in one (1) minute (single vehicle or trailer without airbrakes)
                             or
                          Four (4) pounds in one (1) minute (combination vehicle) after first stabilization.

    5. Air Warning Device(s) Test

280  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
             · Without re-starting the engine, make sure the key or electrical power is in the "on" or
                  "battery charge" position.

    6. Begin fanning off the air pressure by applying and releasing the foot brake and identify the
         level the low air warning devices (buzzer, light, and flag) activates. The low air warning devices
         (buzzer, light, and flag) should activate before air pressure drops below 55 psi.

    7. Emergency Brake(s) Test

             · Continue to fan off the air pressure. The parking brake (or emergency brake) valve
                  should close (pop out) between 20 psi and 45 psi (no less than 20 psi and no more than
                  45 psi) OR level specified by the manufacturer.

             · On air operated trailers, the tractor protection valve and trailer parking brake (or
                  emergency brake) valve should close (pop out) either before or at the same time as the
                  valve for the power unit.

    8. You will need to identify the level specified by the manufacturer for the vehicle you are testing
         in. If the vehicle's valves are not designed to pop out, you will need to listen for the sound of air
         discharging from the air system, which shows the parking (or emergency) brakes have been
         applied. If the vehicle is equipped with a primary and secondary air brake system, you will
         need to explain that there is a backup system and that the valve(s) will not pop out due to loss
         of pressure in only one of the systems.

   NOTE: You will need to explain the specific procedures specified by the manufacturer for the
   vehicle you are testing in. It is your responsibility to know and describe to the examiner the
   vehicle manufacturer's specifications for air systems.

HYDRAULIC BRAKE CHECK (HYDRAULIC BRAKE EQUIPPED VEHICLES ONLY)

Description: Follow this procedure when you are inspecting hydraulic brakes. Types of hydraulic
brake systems and inspection procedures will vary.

Why Inspect: Damaged hydraulic hoses, leaks in the braking system or low hydraulic fluid will result
in a partial or total loss of the braking system that may result in increased stopping distances or a
crash.

How To Inspect: Failure to explain and show the hydraulic brake check correctly will result in an
automatic failure of the CDL Vehicle Inspection test. This check is designed to see that the hydraulic
brakes work correctly. Use the following hydraulic brake check steps based on your vehicle's system
specifications:

    1. Inspect that indicators and warning systems are functioning, as specified by the manufacturer,
         if equipped.

    2. With the transmission placed in "park":
    3. Identify the normal height of the brake pedal
    4. Inspect brake pedal pressure [i.e., pump the brake pedal three (3) times, and then hold it down

         for five (5) seconds], or as specified by the manufacturer. The brake pedal should not move

281  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
     (depress) after initial application and should be firm and have enough reserve for brake pedal
     application.
5. Inspect that any equipped hydraulic power assist systems are functioning, as specified by the
     manufacturer.

NOTE: Hydraulic brake systems can be different. Your system may need the ignition to be in
the "on" position with or without the engine running. You will need to show and explain to the
examiner the procedures for your vehicle as specified by the manufacturer.

11.2 ­ Passenger and School Bus Only

PASSENGER ENTRY AND LIFT

Description: Bus door(s) used for normal entry or exit. Passenger lift used for wheelchair
accessibility.

Why Inspect: All passengers must be able to enter and exit safely.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that entry door(s) are not damaged, operate smoothly and close securely from the
         inside.

    · Inspect that handrails are secure and, if equipped, that the step light(s) are working.
    · Inspect that the entry steps are clear, and the tread is not loose, or worn.
    · If equipped with a passenger lift, inspect for leaking, damaged or missing parts, and explain

         how the lift should be inspected for correct operation.
    · If equipped, lift must be fully retracted and latched securely.

EMERGENCY EXITS

Description: Bus doors, roof hatches, or push-out windows used for emergency evacuation.

Why Inspect: Emergency exits must be operable to provide an escape for passengers during a crash
or emergency.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that all emergency exits are labeled, not damaged, run smoothly, and close securely
         from the inside. Demonstrate that at least one (1) emergency exit opens smoothly, closes
         securely, and is not damaged. Confirm that the exit and warnings work properly. Point out and
         describe how all other emergency exits work.

282                                   Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
    · Inspect that release handles can be used properly both from inside and outside the vehicle.
    · With the key in the "on" or "charged" position, inspect that emergency exit warning devices are

         working.

PASSENGER SEATING

Description: Passenger vehicle seats and frames.

Why Inspect: Seats must be safe for passengers to sit in.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that there are no broken seat frames and inspect that seat frames are firmly attached
         to the floor.

    · Inspect that seat cushions are attached securely to the seat frames.

PASSENGER MONITORING DEVICES

Description: Mirrors and monitoring devices, such as cameras, for seeing and monitoring
passengers or students.

Why Inspect: Internal (passenger) and external (fender, cross-over and other) mirrors or monitoring
devices for seeing passengers or students help the driver to safely check passengers while driving,
loading, and unloading. As a bus driver, you must be able to see when passengers board and
discharge the bus.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that all internal and external passenger mirrors and mirror brackets are not bent and
         are mounted securely with no missing parts.

    · Inspect all internal and external passenger mirrors for proper adjustment and that they are
         clean.

    · If equipped, inspect that passenger monitoring devices or cameras are clean and viewable
         from the inside and the video display is operable and adjusted for viewing.

    · Inspect student crossover mirrors (school bus only).

11.3 ­ School Bus Only

STUDENT LIGHTS (FRONT AND BACK)

Description: Strobe light (if equipped), alternately flashing amber lights and alternately flashing red
lights on school buses.

283                     Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
Why Inspect: Student lights allow the driver of a school bus to communicate presence and intentions
to stop/resume student loading and unloading with other traffic.

How To Inspect: The following student lights must be inspected, and the operation demonstrated, on
both the front and back of the vehicle:

    · Inspect that any equipped strobe light is operational and is not broken. Inspect that the strobe
         light indicator on the dash is operational.

    · Inspect that alternately flashing amber lights (if equipped), on both front and rear of vehicle,
         are operational and are not broken. Inspect that the flashing amber light indicator on the dash
         is operational.

    · Inspect that alternately flashing red lights, on both front and rear of the vehicle, are operational
         and are not broken. Inspect that the flashing red light indicator on the dash is operational.

STOP ARM(S) AND SAFETY ARM

Description: The stop arm and safety arm on school buses used when student loading and
unloading lights are activated.

Why Inspect:

    · Stop Arm ­ Warns other drivers a school bus is stopping or is stopped.
    · Safety Arm ­ Forces school students to cross at least 10 feet away from the front of the

         school bus in the driver's view.

How To Inspect: The following school bus safety items must be inspected and the operation of must
be described and shown.

    · Inspect that any equipped stop arms are securely mounted to the vehicle frame and there are
         no loose, broken, or damaged parts. Inspect the stop arm extends fully when used, stop arm
         lights are operational and that the stop arm indicator on the dash is operational.

    · Inspect that safety arm, if equipped, is securely mounted to the vehicle frame and there are no
         loose, broken, or damaged parts. Inspect that the safety arm functions properly in conjunction
         with the stop arm, it extends fully.

FIRST AID EMERGENCY AND BODY FLUID KITS

Description: Required emergency equipment (including emergency first aid kit and body fluid
cleanup kit) for a school bus.

Why Inspect: Emergency equipment must be available and in usable condition.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that emergency first aid kit is present and the seal has not been broken, which may
         mean missing items.

284  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
    · Inspect that body fluid cleanup kit is present and the seal has not been broken, which may
         mean missing items.

11.4 ­ Lights Operations Check (All Vehicles)

Description: Headlights, high-beam lights, turn signals, 4-way flashers, clearance lights, taillights,
and brake lights on the front, sides and rear of a commercial motor vehicle and trailer (combination
only).

Why Inspect: Lights allow the driver of a commercial vehicle to see and be seen and to communicate
with other traffic.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that all lights on the front, sides and rear of the vehicle work and illuminate when
         corresponding lights are turned on, including the left and right turn signals, 4-way flashers, low
         beam headlights, high beam headlights, clearance or marker lights, taillights, and brake lights.

    · Inspect that brake lights come "on" when brakes are applied and turn "off" when brakes are
         released.

   NOTE: on a combination vehicle, you need only inspect the rear of the trailer.

   NOTE: The operation of all external lights must be inspected from outside the vehicle,
   including lights activated by an automated light check system. You may ask the examiner to
   help you in inspecting the external operation of the lights. You will need to direct the examiner
   to the front, sides and rear of the vehicle or trailer (combination only), as you conduct the
   inspection. You are responsible for telling the examiner exactly which lights you would like
   them to inspect as you activate the lights from inside the vehicle. You will need to roll the
   window down and speak loud enough for the examiner to hear. If you forget or leave out a
   specific light, you will not get credit.

285  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
11.5 ­ External Inspection (All Vehicles)

11.5.1 ­ Front of Vehicle / Engine Area (Engine Off)

LENSES

Description: Light lenses or covers on the front of the vehicle/tractor.

Why Inspect: Light lenses or covers must be clean and free of damage for lights to work properly.

How To Inspect: Inspect that light lenses or covers are the proper color, clean, not broken and not
missing.

CRITICAL FLUID LEVELS

Description: Engine oil for engine lubrication; coolant for cooling the engine; steering fluid for helping
wheel action to the front wheels; and brake fluid for vehicle braking (hydraulic brakes only).

Why Inspect: Proper fluid levels ensure that engine, cooling, steering and brake systems (hydraulic
brakes only) work correctly and extends the life of the engine and these systems.

How To Inspect: With the engine off, indicate that fluids would be inspected for proper levels
including the:

    · engine oil;
    · cooling system and coolant;
    · power steering fluid; and
    · brake fluid (hydraulic brakes only).

If applicable, show where to inspect the fluid level and where the dipstick(s) or sight glass(es) are
located. Identify that you would inspect that the level is between the add and the full marks for each
item.

Caution: If the engine is hot, do not remove the radiator cap.

FLUID AND AIR LEAKS

Description: Fluid leaks from engine and other vehicle systems; and air leaks, if applicable.

Why Inspect: Fluid loss could mean component failure in areas where levels might not be readily
inspected (e.g., transmission or fuel systems). Air leaks could mean component failure in areas that
may not be easily inspected (e.g., air compressor and other air components).

How To Inspect:

286                                                   Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
    · Look for puddles on the ground.
    · Look for dripping fluids around and on the underside of the engine and transmission.
    · Inspect any hoses and air lines for their condition and leaks.

STEERING SYSTEM

Description: Mechanisms that transform steering column action into wheel turning action.

Why Inspect: Worn, cracked, loose, or broken steering parts could result in loss of steering.
Movement in the linkage can cause the vehicle to wander or experience other serious control
problems.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that the power steering box is securely mounted and not leaking.
    · Inspect that all steering hoses and connections are not cracked, worn, or leaking.
    · Inspect that visible connecting links, arms, and rods from the steering box to the wheel are not

         worn or cracked and that joints and sockets are not worn or loose.
    · Inspect for missing nuts, bolts, or cotter keys/pins in the steering connections.

11.5.2 ­ Axle Components/Steering Axle

TIRES

Description: Tire/wheel assemblies in contact with the pavement.

Why Inspect: Underinflation increases the chance of blowout from excessive heat buildup due to
increased flexing of the tire. Low tread depth increases the effect of hydroplaning, reduces traction
and increases stopping distance.

Overinflation increases the chances of damage to the tire from curbs and potholes and loss of traction
due to less tread in contact with the road. Cuts and bulges may cause tire failure, blowouts, and
sudden loss of control.

How To Inspect: The following items must be inspected:

    · Tire inflation: Inspect for proper inflation using a tire gauge. Make sure all valve stems are
         accessible.

    · Tire condition: Inspect for cuts and damage that expose body plies to the tire in the tread and
         sidewall. Make sure that valve caps are not missing, and valve stems are not damaged or
         broken. Look for bumps and bulges in the sidewall and mismatched diameters in dual tires.

    · Tread depth: Inspect for minimum tread depth with a tread depth gauge on all major tread
         grooves with wear bars. Tread depth should be at least 4/32 inches on steering axle tires and
         2/32 inches on all other tires.

287  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
NOTE: You will not get credit if you only kick the tires or use a mallet to inspect for proper
inflation. You must mention the use of a tire gauge.

NOTE: If the tires are equipped with an automatic tire inflation system (ATIS) or tire pressure
monitoring system (TPMS) that has hoses connected to the tire valve stems, you only need
to mention that tire pressure is monitored and adjusted by an automatic system and inspect
that it is working properly.

RIMS

Description: The metal rims or wheels on which tires are mounted.

Why Inspect: Damaged rims can result in loss of a tire from the rim, loss of a wheel from an axle,
loss of air pressure in a tire, a wheel rolling off a rim due to damage to flange, or split rim. A damaged
wheel can result in loss of vehicle control, leading to a crash. Wheels and rims should be inspected
for conditions that could result in a complete or partial wheel separation or air loss in the tire.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect for damaged, cracked, or bent rims. Rims cannot have welding repairs. Inspect for rust
         trails that may mean the rim is loose on a wedge wheel.

    · Inspect bolt holes to make sure they are not elongated (out of round).

LUG NUTS

Description: Holds wheel on axle.

Why Inspect: Loose or missing lug nuts could result in the loss of a wheel and lead to a crash.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that all lug nuts are present.
    · Inspect that lug nuts are not loose and there are no signs of rust trails or shiny threads that

         may show looseness.
    · Inspect that there are no bent, broken, or missing studs.

SPRINGS/MOUNTS, U-BOLTS AND AIR BAGS AND SHOCKS

Description: Leaf or coil springs for dampening wheel vibration forces created by rolling over road
surface. U-shaped bolts and mounting bolts used for attaching suspension assembly to the axle. Air
bags that work with springs or serve as the primary suspension system. Gas or hydraulic devices
(shocks) that cushion vehicle suspension and stabilize the vehicle.

Why Inspect: Damaged or missing leaf springs or coils may lead to loss of control or rollover if the
vehicle falls on the frame or on a tire. Shifted springs may strike a tire causing a blowout or

288  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
interference with steering. Loose or broken U-bolts may lead to loss of vehicle control or rollover.
Damaged air bags or shocks can affect vehicle handling and stopping distances.

How To Inspect: The following items must be inspected, where visible and accessible:

    · Inspect for missing, shifted, cracked, or broken leaf springs and inspect that spring mounts are
         not cracked, broken, or missing any parts.

    · Inspect for broken or distorted coil springs and inspect that mounts are not cracked, broken or
         have any missing parts.

    · Inspect that U-bolts and mounting bolts are not broken, missing, or loose.
    · Inspect that the air ride suspension is secure, not damaged, and not leaking (if equipped).
    · Inspect that shock absorbers are secure, not damaged, and not leaking (if equipped).
    · Inspect that the vehicle is sitting level (front to rear and side to side).

   NOTE: You need to tell the examiner if the suspension components are not visible or
   accessible, on vehicles like transit or motor coach buses. Inspect that the vehicle is sitting
   level from front to rear and side to side. Note that if your vehicle is leaning, that is a sign there
   may be a suspension problem.

BRAKE LINES / HOSES / LEAKS

Description: Carries air or hydraulic fluid to wheel brake assembly.

Why Inspect: Loss of hydraulic fluid may lead to loss of brake power and response. Loss of air
pressure may cause wheel lockup.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that hoses or lines can supply air or hydraulic fluid to the brakes and are not leaking.
    · Inspect for cracked, worn or frayed hoses or lines.
    · Inspect that all hose or line couplings and fittings are secure.
    · Note: If electric brakes, inspect that electric lines are secure, and casing is not worn or

         cracked.

BRAKE CONTAMINATES

Description: Contamination, such as grease, oil, etc., that can affect braking performance when
slowing or stopping the vehicle.

Why Inspect: Contaminates on the brakes can cause a reduction in braking friction which may lead
to a crash. Contaminates can also create a fire hazard.

289  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
How To Inspect: If accessible, inspect for contaminants such as grease or oil on the brake lining or
pads and the brake drum or disc that can affect braking.

11.5.3 ­ Side of Vehicle

LENSES AND REFLECTORS

Description: Light lenses or covers and reflectors on the sides of the vehicle and trailer (combination
only).

Why Inspect: Light lenses or covers must be free of damage for lights to work properly. Reflectors
allow the commercial vehicle to be seen and to communicate your presence with other traffic.

Inspection:

    · Inspect that light lenses or covers on the sides of the vehicle and trailer (combination only) are
         the proper color, clean, not broken, or missing.

    · Inspect that reflectors on the sides of the vehicle and trailer (combination only) are the proper
         color, clean, not broken, or missing.

TRAFFIC MONITORING DEVICES

Description: Side view mirrors for rear view of traffic to the sides and behind (all vehicles). Other
monitoring devices, such as cameras, may be used with mirrors or instead of mirrors.

Why Inspect: Mirrors or other monitoring devices provide visibility to the sides and rear of the
vehicle. The driver must be able to see other traffic, especially in blind areas.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that mirror(s) are clean and not cracked and mirror brackets are not bent and are
         mounted securely with no missing parts.

    · If equipped, rear and side view monitoring devices or cameras must be clean to view from the
         inside.

BATTERY

Description: Batteries that supply electrical current for vehicle functions or serve as a partial or
primary source for vehicle power.

Why Inspect: Damage to the batteries, electrical system or electric motor can cause vehicle
breakdowns or electrical shortage leading to a fire onboard the vehicle.

How To Inspect: Wherever they are located:

    · Inspect that batteries are secure, if visible.

290  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
· Inspect that all connections are tight and should not show signs of excessive corrosion, if
     visible.

· Inspect all electrical system cables and lines are secure and not cracked or worn.
· Inspect that the battery box, cover, or door is secure, if applicable.

NOTE: Inform the examiner if the batteries are not visible or accessible. If they are not visible
or accessible, you should describe what you are inspecting.

FUEL TANK/DEF TANK
Description: A container that holds fuel.
Why Inspect: Leaks are a fire hazard and can cause driving hazards to other traffic. Fuel on
pavement can be very slippery.
How To Inspect: Inspect that the fuel tank, including a Diesel Exhaust Fluid (DEF) tank, if equipped,
is securely mounted, the cap is tight, and there are no leaks from the tank or line.

FRAME(S)
Description: Structural members for supporting vehicle body or trailer body.
Why Inspect: Loose or cracked frame members may reduce vehicle stability, cause handling and
cornering problems (e.g., wandering, possible rollover) resulting in total loss of vehicle control.
Cracks, breaks, or holes in the cargo area can result in possible loss of cargo.
How To Inspect:

    · Inspect for cracks, broken welds, holes, or other damage to the frame members, including the
         trailer, if applicable.

    · Inspect for cracks, breaks, or holes in the cargo area or floor, including the trailer, if applicable.
    · Inspect that trailer tandem release lever and pins are secure, if applicable.

11.5.4 ­ Rear of Vehicle or Trailer:

LENSES AND REFLECTORS
Description: Light lenses or covers and reflectors on rear of vehicle or trailer (combination only).
Why Inspect: Light lenses or covers must be free of damage for lights to work properly. Reflectors
allow the driver of a commercial vehicle to be seen and to communicate presence with other traffic.
How To Inspect:

291  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
    · Inspect that light lenses or covers are the proper color, clean, not broken and not missing.
    · Inspect that reflectors are the proper color, clean, not broken and not missing.

   NOTE: on a combination vehicle, you need only inspect the rear of the trailer.

11.6 ­ Combination Vehicles

11.6.1 ­ Combination Vehicles Only

AIR AND ELECTRIC LINES / CONNECTORS
Description: Carry air and electricity from power unit to trailer.
Why Inspect: Air Brakes - Loss of air to the trailer will result in a partial or total loss of braking to the
towed unit. A low air condition will cause sudden application of the trailer's spring brakes, which may
result in loss of control and lead to a crash.

    · Electric Brakes ­ Loss of electrical connection to the trailer will result in total loss of braking
         and control to the towed unit and can lead to a crash.

    · Electric Lines ­ Damaged lines may result in loss of the vehicle's ability to communicate its
         maneuvers to other drivers (no turn, or brake lights). Not being seen by other traffic at night is
         a serious traffic hazard and can lead to a crash.

How To Inspect:
    · Inspect that air and electric connectors on the power unit and trailer are seated and sealed,
         free of damage and locked into place.
    · Inspect that air hoses and electrical lines are not cut, cracked, chafed, spliced, taped, or worn
         (steel braid/electrical conductor must not show through). Listen for air leaks (air brake systems
         only).
    · Inspect that electrical lines and air lines (if equipped) are not tangled, crimped, or pinched, or
         dragging against vehicle parts or the ground.

   NOTE: You must inspect the connections on both the power unit and trailer to receive credit.

292  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
For the rest of this section (11.6.1), you will need to study the type of coupling system your
vehicle is equipped with ­ that you will be using for your Vehicle Inspection test:

    · Fifth Wheel Combination, or
    · Pintle Hook Combination, or
    · All Other Types of Combinations.

FOR FIFTH WHEEL COMBINATIONS ONLY

Fifth Wheel Skid Plate

Description: Plate on which the trailer rests and secures the trailer kingpin.

Why Inspect: A faulty or damaged fifth wheel skid plate and an improper connection between the
tractor and the trailer can result in handling problems, rollover, or separation of the tractor and trailer
leading to a crash.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that the fifth wheel skid plate is securely mounted to the vehicle by the fifth wheel
         platform.

    · Inspect for cracks, breaks or excessive wear.
    · Inspect for proper lubrication, if applicable.
Kingpin, Apron & Gap

Description: Pin that attaches the semi-trailer to tractor (kingpin) and the metal plate attached to the
kingpin that provides the surface for resting the trailer on the fifth wheel (apron).

Why Inspect: Wear or damage to the kingpin can result in handling problems, rollover, or separation
of the tractor and trailer leading to a crash.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that the kingpin is in place and not bent, damaged or worn.
    · Inspect that the visible part of the apron is not bent, cracked, or broken.
    · Inspect that the trailer is lying flat on the fifth wheel skid plate and there is no space between

         the apron and fifth wheel (no gap).
    · Inspect for proper lubrication, if applicable.

293  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
FOR PINTLE HOOK COMBINATIONS ONLY

Pintle Hook

Description: Tow hitch or receiving coupling which the trailer drawbar ring/eye locks into.

Why Inspect: A faulty or damaged pintle hook and an improper connection between the power unit
and the trailer can result in handling problems, rollover, or separation of the power unit and trailer
leading to a crash.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that the pintle hook is securely mounted to the vehicle frame.
    · Inspect for loose or missing parts including mounting bolts, nuts, pins, brackets, and clamps.
    · Inspect for cracks, breaks or excessive wear.

Trailer Drawbar Ring & Tongue

Description: Trailer drawbar ring or eye attached to the front of the trailer tongue that secures into
the pintle hook for coupling. The trailer tongue that extends from the trailer's main body frame to allow
for coupling and turning.

Why Inspect: Wear, damage, cracks or improper welds in the drawbar ring and trailer tongue may
result in loss of the trailer leading to a crash.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that the drawbar ring or eye is not bent or twisted.
    · Inspect that the drawbar ring or eye is secured to the trailer tongue and there are no loose or

         missing bolts, broken welds, or cracks.
    · Inspect that the drawbar ring or eye is not worn.
    · Inspect the trailer tongue for dents, twists, cracks, and broken welds and that the trailer tongue

         can support the weight of the load. If extendable, inspect that bolts, locking pins, and cotter
         pins are in place.

ALL OTHER TYPES OF COMBINATIONS

   NOTE: Coupling systems vary. If you have another type of coupling system, you will need to
   describe to the examiner how it works and what you are inspecting.

Tow Hitch

Description: Tow or receiver hitch and trailer ball, which the trailer coupler rests on.

294  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
Why Inspect: A faulty or damaged tow hitch or other mechanism and an improper connection
between the power unit and the trailer can result in handling problems, rollover, or separation of the
power unit and trailer leading to a crash.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that the tow hitch or other mechanism is securely mounted to the vehicle frame.
         Inspect sway bar/control, if equipped.

    · Inspect for loose or missing parts including mounting bolts, nuts, pins, brackets, and clamps,
         including the trailer ball or other mechanism.

    · Inspect for cracks, breaks or excessive wear.

Trailer Coupler & Tongue

Description: Trailer coupler attached to the front of the trailer tongue that latches to the trailer hitch
and trailer ball. The trailer tongue extends from the trailer's main body frame to allow for coupling and
turning.

Why Inspect: Wear, damage, cracks or improper welds in the trailer coupler and trailer tongue may
result in loss of the trailer, leading to a crash.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that the trailer coupler is not bent or twisted.
    · Inspect that the trailer coupler is secured to the trailer tongue and there are no loose or

         missing bolts, broken welds, or cracks.
    · Inspect that the trailer coupler is not worn.
    · Inspect the trailer tongue for dents, twists, cracks, and broken welds and that the trailer tongue

         can support the weight of the load. If the trailer is extendable, inspect that bolts, locking pins
         and cotter pins are in place.

Locking and Safety Devices

Description: Locking connection and safety devices that keep the trailer locked into place.

Why Inspect: The trailer could uncouple during travel if the locking mechanisms are not secured.
Safety devices help to keep the locking mechanism in place and help should the connection fail.

How To Inspect: Fifth Wheel Coupling Systems Only

    · Look into fifth wheel gap and inspect that locking jaws or lever are fully secured around the
         kingpin and inspect for play between kingpin and locking jaws/lever.

    · Inspect that the release arm is in the engaged position and the safety latch or lock (if
         equipped) is in place.

    · Inspect the sliding fifth wheel locking pins (if equipped) for damage and the pins are fully
         engaged.

295  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
HOW TO INSPECT ALL OTHER COUPLING SYSTEMS
    · Inspect the locking mechanism or latch for missing or broken parts and make sure the pintle or
         hitch release lever or latch is locked in place and secure.
    · Inspect that safety pins and cotter pins are in place and not missing, if present.
    · Inspect that safety cables or chains are secure, crossed, and free of kinks and excessive
         slack, if present. Breakaway cables must be engaged.

11.6.2 ­ Trailers Only

LANDING GEAR AND CLEARANCE

Description: Supports front end of trailer when trailer is not coupled to a truck or tractor.

Why Inspect: Landing gear must be raised properly so that it will not strike the ground during travel
and must clear the back of the power unit while turning. Its handle must be secured to the vehicle so
it will not move and strike other traffic. Any damage to landing gear supports may result in the trailer
tipping or falling over when disconnected.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that the landing gear is fully raised, has no missing parts, the crank handle is secure,
         and the support frame and landing pads are not damaged.

    · If power operated, inspect for air or hydraulic leaks.
    · If you are using a tractor semi-trailer, inspect that the fifth wheel is positioned properly so that

         the tractor frame will clear the landing gear during turns (fixed or sliding fifth wheel).

REFLECTIVE TAPE

Description: Reflective tape on the side and rear of the trailer, if needed.

Why Inspect: Reflective tape on a trailer allows the driver of a commercial vehicle to be seen and to
communicate presence with other traffic.

How To Inspect:

    · Inspect that reflector tape on the sides and rear of the trailer are present and affixed securely
         to the vehicle.

    · Note: Reflective tape is only required for trailers. Some jurisdictional laws may require
         reflective tape for school buses.

Basic Control Skills Test

Remember, the Vehicle Inspection test must be passed before you can continue to the Basic Control
Skills test (covered in the next section).

296  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
                 Class A Checklist

     Tractor Semi-Trailer or Truck & Trailer or Bus & Trailer

In-Vehicle/Engine Start                   Lights Operations Check
 *air or *hydraulic brake check            all external lights
 parking & trailer brake check
 service brake check                      Front of Vehicle/Engine Area
 lighting indicators                       lenses
 emergency equipment                       fluid levels
 windshield & traffic monitoring devices   fluid & air leaks
 wipers & washers                          steering systems
 heater & defroster
 horn(s)                                  Steering Axle
                                           tires
                                           rims
                                           lug nuts
                                           springs/mounts & u-bolts & air bags & shocks
                                           brake lines or hoses & leaks
                                           brake contaminates

                                          Side of Vehicle
                                           lenses & reflectors
                                           traffic monitoring devices
                                           battery
                                           fuel tank/DEF tank
                                           frame(s) & tandem release

                                          Combination Vehicles Only
                                           air & electric lines & connectors
                                           fifth wheel skid plate or pintle hook or tow hitch
                                           kingpin & apron & gap or drawbar ring & tongue or

                                               coupler & tongue
                                           locking & safety devices

                                          Trailer Only
                                           landing gear & clearance
                                           reflective tape

                                          Rear of Trailer
                                          Passenger and School Bus Only
                                           passenger entry & lift
                                           emergency exits
                                           passenger seating
                                           passenger monitoring devices
                                          School Bus Only
                                           student lights (front & back)
                                           stop arm(s) & safety arm
                                           first aid & body fluid kits
                                           lenses & reflectors

*Automatic failure if not performed correctly

You are only required to inspect the items on the CDL Vehicle Inspection checklist. You may use this
checklist for your test and check off items as you have completed them, NO additional markings or writing may
be placed on this list. You MUST name, point to and/or touch, and fully explain what you are inspecting each
safety critical item for. If you do not do so, you will not get credit for the item(s).

297                                       Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
                    Class B or Class C Checklist

                               Straight Truck or Other Straight Vehicle

                                                                                       In-Vehicle/Engine Start
                                                                                        *air or *hydraulic brake check
                                                                                        parking & trailer brake check
                                                                                        service brake check
                                                                                        lighting indicators
                                                                                        emergency equipment
                                                                                        windshield & traffic monitoring devices
                                                                                        wipers & washers
                                                                                        heater & defroster
                                                                                        horn(s)

                                                                                       Lights Operations Check
                                                                                        all external lights

                                                                                       Front of Vehicle/Engine Area
                                                                                        lenses
                                                                                        fluid levels
                                                                                        fluid & air leaks
                                                                                        steering systems

                                                                                       Steering Axle
                                                                                        tires
                                                                                        rims
                                                                                        lug nuts
                                                                                        springs/mounts & u-bolts & air bags & shocks
                                                                                        brake lines or hoses & leaks
                                                                                        brake contaminates

                                                                                       Side of Vehicle
                                                                                        lenses & reflectors
                                                                                        traffic monitoring devices
                                                                                        battery
                                                                                        fuel tank/DEF tank
                                                                                        frame

                                                                                       Rear of Vehicle
                                                                                        lenses & reflectors

*Automatic failure if not performed correctly

You are only required to inspect the items on the CDL Vehicle Inspection checklist. You may use this
checklist for your test and check off items as you have completed them, NO additional markings or writing may
be placed on this list. You MUST name, point to and/or touch and fully explain what you are inspecting each
safety critical item for. If you do not do so, you will not get credit for the item(s).

298  Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
     Class B or Class C Checklist

                 Passenger or School Bus

In-Vehicle/Engine Start                   Passenger and School Bus Only
 *air or *hydraulic brake check            passenger entry & lift
 parking & trailer brake check             emergency exits
 service brake check                       passenger seating
 lighting indicators                       passenger monitoring devices
 emergency equipment
 windshield & traffic monitoring devices  School Bus Only
 wipers & washers                          student lights (front & back)
 heater & defroster                        stop arm(s) & safety arm
 horn(s)                                   first aid & body fluid kits

                                          Lights Operations Check
                                           all external lights

                                          Front of Vehicle/Engine Area
                                           lenses
                                           fluid levels
                                           fluid & air leaks
                                           steering systems

                                          Steering Axle
                                           tires
                                           rims
                                           lug nut
                                           springs/mounts & u-bolts & air bags & shocks
                                           brake lines or hoses & leaks
                                           brake contaminates

                                          Side of Vehicle
                                           lenses & reflectors
                                           traffic monitoring devices
                                           battery
                                           fuel tank/DEF tank
                                           frame

                                          Rear of Vehicle
                                           lenses & reflectors

*Automatic failure if not performed correctly

You are only required to inspect the items on the CDL Vehicle Inspection checklist. You may use this
checklist for your test and check off items as you have completed them, NO additional markings or writing may
be placed on this list. You MUST name, point to and/or touch, and fully explain what you are inspecting each
safety critical item for. If you do not do so, you will not get credit for the item(s).

299                                       Section 11: Vehicle Inspection Test
Section 12: Basic Control Skills Test

This Section Covers

    6. Basic Control Skills Test Scoring
    7. Basic Control Skills Test Exercises

For the Basic Control Skills test, you will show basic skills in controlling a commercial vehicle and
judging its position in relation to other objects.

It tests for the basic skills needed for safe control and operation of the vehicle. The types of judgment
and skills needed for these basic control skills are also needed in many different driving situations.

If you make mistakes or errors during the test, you will be given points. You will get points for
changing direction to gain a better position, crossing over or touching boundary lines or cones and for
your final position.

The examiner may allow you to exit the vehicle to check around the vehicle during backing exercises.
When entering or exiting the vehicle, you must set your parking brake, place the vehicle in neutral,
and safely exit/enter by facing the vehicle and keeping three (3) points of contact at all times. When
entering or exiting a bus, face forward and keep a firm grasp on the handrail.

If at any time you open the door, move from a seated position when in physical control of the vehicle,
(or on a bus, walk to the back to get a better view), you will be scored for a look.

You will receive specific instructions for each exercise prior to performing them. You will have an
opportunity to ask questions. You must complete the exercise as directed. If you see the examiner
raise their hand (like this ), stop and return your vehicle within the exercise boundary lines.

Your Basic Control Skills test will include the following exercises, either off-road or somewhere on the
street during the Road test:

    · Step 1 ­ Forward Stop,
    · Step 2 ­ Straight-Line Backing,
    · Step 3 ­ Forward Offset Tracking, and
    · Step 4 ­ Reverse Offset Backing.

These exercises are shown in Figures 12.1 through 12.4.

12.1 ­ Scoring

During the Basic Control Skills test exercises, you will be scored for:

300                                                                      Section 12: Basic Control Skills Test
Pull-ups ­ pulling forward on a backing exercise to clear an encroachment or to get a better position
is scored as a "pull-up." These exercises include:

    · Exercise 2 ­ Straight-Line Backing and
    · Exercise 4 ­ Reverse Offset Backing.

The examiner will score the number of times you pull-up.

Stopping without changing direction does not count as a pull-up.

You will not be penalized for your first pull-ups. However, an excessive number of pull-ups will count
as errors. Your examiner will cover pull-ups when giving instructions for these exercises.

Encroachments ­ touching or crossing over an exercise boundary line or cone with any part of your
vehicle EXCEPT:

    · Your vehicle's mirrors (door or fender) OR
    · Unique vehicle parts at or higher than door mirror height, such as a bucket truck.

Touching or crossing over and exercise boundary line or cone with unique parts below door mirror
height are counted as an encroachment.

If you have encroached, the examiner will stop you and you must return the vehicle within the
exercise boundaries. You must stop immediately when signaled by the examiner. The examiner will
score the number of times you touch or cross over an exercise boundary line or cone. Each
encroachment will count as an error.

Looks ­ exiting the vehicle while performing an exercise to check the vehicle's position while
backing. You may be allowed to safely stop and exit the vehicle to check the external position of the
vehicle (look).

When doing so, you must set the parking brake(s) and place the vehicle in Neutral or Park. Then,
when exiting/entering the vehicle, you must be facing the vehicle and always keeping three (3) points
of contact with the vehicle (when exiting/entering a bus, you may face forward and keep a firm grasp
on the handrail). If you do not safely secure the vehicle or safely exit and enter the vehicle, it may
result in an automatic failure for an unsafe act.

If you open your door or move from a seated position, it will count as a look. If you open your door
while the vehicle is moving, it may result in an automatic failure for an unsafe act.

On a bus, if you walk to the back of the bus to get a better view, it will count as a look.

You may be allowed a maximum of one (1) free look on Exercise 2 ­ Straight-line Backing, and two
(2) free looks on Exercise 4 ­ Reverse Offset Backing, to check the position of your vehicle. Your
examiner will cover looks when giving instructions for these exercises.

Final Position ­ the final position of the vehicle for backing exercises. You will be scored for final
vehicle position on Exercise 2 ­ Straight-Line Backing and on Exercise 4 ­ Reverse Offset Backing.

After completing of an exercise:

301  Section 12: Basic Control Skills Test
    · set the parking brake,
    · place the vehicle in neutral or park, and
    · sound the horn indicating you have completed the exercise.

It is important that you finish each exercise exactly as the examiner has instructed. Your vehicle must
be within final exercise boundaries (other than mirrors and unique vehicle parts at or higher than door
mirror height, such as a bucket truck). If you do not maneuver the vehicle into its final position as
described by the examiner, you will be penalized and will fail the Basic Control Skills test. You MUST
complete the exercises as directed.

Failure to Follow Instructions or Unsafe Act ­ Failure to follow examiner instructions for
completing the exercise as directed may result in an automatic failure and the test may be stopped by
the examiner. Always follow the examiner's instructions and directions. If you do not understand the
instructions or understand how to complete the exercises, ask the examiner for clarification. If you
ask, the examiner may allow you to walk through the exercise area.

Committing an "unsafe act" (e.g., forgetting to set the parking brake or opening the door while in
motion), may result in an automatic failure for an unsafe act and the test may be stopped by the
examiner. Safety of the driver, the examiner and the testing area is of the highest priority. Always
think SAFETY.

12.2 ­ Exercises

12.2.1 ­ Exercise 1: Forward Stop

You will show your ability to judge the front of your vehicle during a controlled stop. Drive forward
through the alley and stop with the front most part of the vehicle within the box at the end of the alley
without going past it. You may stop only once.

Your examiner will point out the front part of your vehicle when giving instructions for this exercise.

When you have stopped, set your parking brake, shift to neutral or park, and sound the horn. You will
receive points if the front most part of the vehicle (other than unique vehicle parts at or higher than
door mirror height, such as a bucket truck) is not in the stop box. See Figure 12.1.

     Figure 12.1: Exercise 1 ­ Forward Stop

302  Section 12: Basic Control Skills Test
12.2.2 ­ Exercise 2: Straight Line Backing

You will show your ability to back a vehicle in a straight line. From your stopped position from the
earlier exercise, the examiner will ask you to pull forward and stop when they raise their hand (like
this ).

Then back straight through the alley until the front of your vehicle has cleared the last set of cones at
the far end of the alley. See Figure 12.2.

                                  Figure 12.2: Exercise 2 ­ Straight Line Backing

You will be scored for pull-ups, encroachments, and final position.
You are allowed one (1) free pull-up and may safely exit the vehicle only one (1) time to check around
the vehicle.
When you have completed the exercise, set your parking brake, shift to neutral/park, and sound your
horn. This will inform the examiner you have completed the exercise.

12.2.3 ­ Exercise 3: Forward Offset Tracking

You will show your ability to maneuver a vehicle around other objects while moving forward without
stopping.
You will drive forward and steer to the left through the opening into the opposite lane, keeping the
right most rear tire between the cone and the line without stopping.
You will be scored for encroachments and forward tracking clearance (rear tire between the cone and
the line).
You are NOT allowed to stop, back-up, or exit the vehicle during this exercise. If you stop, the
exercise will be over.
Stop your vehicle when you are:

    · parallel to the outer boundary AND

303  Section 12: Basic Control Skills Test
    · before or at the cones at the far end of the exercise.

Then, set your parking brake, shift to neutral/park, and sound your horn. This will inform the examiner
you have completed the exercise. See Figure 12.3.

                                Figure 12.3: Exercise 3 ­ Forward Offset Tracking

12.2.4 ­ Exercise 4: Reverse Offset Backing

You will show your ability to offset back and park a vehicle at the end of an alley. From the stopped
position of the earlier exercise and parallel with the outer boundary, offset back into the alley, bringing
the rear most part of your vehicle within three (3) feet of the rear of the alley.
Stop with the rear most part of the vehicle in the three (3) foot box at the end of the alley.
Your examiner will point out the rear most part of your vehicle when giving instructions for this
exercise.
If you back beyond the rear boundary of the alley, you will be asked to pull straight forward past the
alley entrance until you are signaled by the examiner to stop, prior to resuming the exercise.
Your vehicle must be straight within the alley when completed. Your vehicle must be completely
within the defined exercise boundaries when completed. You may not go beyond the outer boundary
line. See Figure 12.4

                                 Figure 12.4: Exercise 4 ­ Reverse Offset Backing
You will be scored for pull-ups, encroachments, and final position.

304  Section 12: Basic Control Skills Test
You are allowed two (2) free pull-ups and may exit the vehicle a maximum of two (2) times to check
around the vehicle during this exercise.
When you have completed the exercise, set your parking brake, shift to neutral or park, and sound
your horn. This will inform the examiner you have completed the exercise.

Road Test

Remember, the Basic Control Skills test must be passed before you can proceed to the Road Test.
BASIC CONTROL SKILLS DIAGRAM W/ CONE PLACEMENT:

BASIC CONTROL SKILLS DIMENSIONS - DIMENSIONS

BASIC CONTROL SKILLS DIMENSIONS - LARGER VIEWS OF MARKERS AND BOXES

305  Section 12: Basic Control Skills Test
Section 13: On-road Driving

This Section Covers: How you will be tested.

You will drive over a test route that has a variety of traffic situations. During the test, you must drive
safely and responsibly.

    · Wear your safety belt.
    · Obey all traffic signs, signals, and laws.
    · Complete the test without an accident or moving violation.

During the driving test, the examiner will be scoring you on specific driving maneuvers as well as on
your general driving behavior. You will follow the directions of the examiner. Directions will be given to
you so you will have plenty of time to do what the examiner has asked. You will not be asked to drive
in an unsafe manner.

If your test route does not have certain traffic situations, you may be asked to simulate a traffic
situation. You will do this by telling the examiner what you are or would be doing if you were in that
traffic situation.

13.1 ­ How You Will Be Tested

13.1.1 ­ Turns

When the examiner asks you to make a turn:
    · Check traffic in all directions.
    · Use turn signals and safely get into the lane needed for the turn.

As you approach the turn:
    · Use turn signals to warn others of your turn.
    · Slow down smoothly, change gears as needed to keep power, but do not coast unsafely.
         Unsafe coasting occurs when your vehicle is out of gear (clutch depressed or gearshift in
         neutral) for more than the length of your vehicle.

If you need to stop before making the turn:
    · Come to a smooth stop without skidding.
    · Come to a complete stop behind the stop line, crosswalk, or stop sign.

306  Section 13: On-road Driving
If stopping behind another vehicle, stop where you can see the rear tires on the vehicle ahead
of you (safe gap).

    · Do not let your vehicle roll.
    · Keep the front wheels aimed straight ahead.

When you are ready to turn:

    · Check traffic in all directions.
    · Keep both hands on the steering wheel during the turn.
    · Keep checking your mirror to make sure the vehicle does not hit anything on the inside of the

         turn.
    · Your vehicle should not move into oncoming traffic. Your vehicle should finish the turn in the

         correct lane.

After making the turn:

    · Make sure the turn signal is off.
    · Get up to speed of traffic, use turn signal, and move into the right-most lane when safe to do

         so (if not already there).
    · Check mirrors and traffic.

13.1.2 ­ Intersections

As you approach an intersection:

    · Check traffic thoroughly in all directions. Decelerate gently.
    · Brake smoothly and, if necessary, change gears.
    · If necessary, come to a complete stop (no coasting) behind any stop signs, signals, sidewalks,

         or stop lines maintaining a safe gap behind any vehicle in front of you.
    · Your vehicle must not roll forward or backward.

When driving through an intersection:

    · Check traffic thoroughly in all directions.
    · Decelerate and yield to any pedestrians and traffic in the intersection.
    · Do not change lanes while proceeding through the intersection.
    · Keep your hands on the wheel.

Once through the intersection:

    · Continue checking mirrors and traffic.
    · Accelerate smoothly and change gears as necessary.

307  Section 13: On-road Driving
13.1.3 ­ Urban Business

During this part of the test, you must make regular traffic checks and maintain a safe following
distance. Your vehicle should be centered in the proper lane (right-most lane) and you should keep
up with the flow of traffic without exceeding the posted speed limit.

13.1.4 ­ Lane Changes

During multiple lane portions of the test, you will be asked to change lanes to the left, and then back
to the right. You should make the necessary traffic checks first, then use proper signals and smoothly
change lanes when it is safe to do so.

13.1.5 ­ Expressway or Rural or Limited Access Highway

Before you enter the expressway:

    · Check traffic.
    · Use proper signals.
    · Merge smoothly into the proper lane of traffic.
Once you are on the expressway:

    · Maintain proper lane positioning, vehicle spacing, and vehicle speed.
    · Continue to check traffic thoroughly in all directions.
When you exit the expressway:

    · Make necessary traffic checks.
    · Use proper signals.
    · Decelerate smoothly in the exit lane.
    · Once you are on the exit ramp, you must continue to decelerate within the lane markings and

         keep adequate spacing between your vehicle and other vehicles.

13.1.6 ­ Stop and Start

For this maneuver, you will be asked to pull your vehicle over to the side of the road and stop as if
you were going to get out and check something on your vehicle. You must check traffic thoroughly in
all directions and move to the right-most lane or shoulder of road.
As you prepare for the stop:

    · Check traffic.
    · Activate your right turn signal.

308  Section 13: On-road Driving
    · Decelerate smoothly, brake evenly, change gears as necessary.
    · Bring your vehicle to a full stop without coasting.
Once you are stopped:

    · The vehicle must be parallel to the curb or shoulder of the road and safely out of the
         traffic flow.

    · The vehicle should not be blocking driveways, fire hydrants, intersections, signs, etc.
    · Cancel your turn signal.
    · Activate your four-way emergency flashers. Apply the parking brake.
    · Move the gear shift to neutral or park.
    · Remove your feet from the brake and clutch pedals.
When you are instructed to resume:

    · Check traffic and your mirrors thoroughly in all directions.
    · Turn off your four-way flashers. Activate the left turn signal.
    · When traffic permits, you should release the parking brake and pull straight ahead.
    · Do not turn the wheel before your vehicle moves.
    · Check traffic from all directions, especially to the left.
    · Steer and accelerate smoothly into the proper lane when safe to do so.
    · Once your vehicle is back into the flow of traffic, cancel your left turn signal.

13.1.7 ­ Curve

When you approach a curve:

    · Check traffic thoroughly in all directions.
    · Before entering the curve, reduce speed so you don't need to keep braking or shifting in the

         curve.
    · Keep your vehicle in the lane.
    · Continue checking traffic in all directions.

13.1.8 ­ Railroad Crossing

Before you reach the crossing, you should:

    · Decelerate, brake smoothly, and shift gears as necessary.
    · Look and listen for the presence of trains.

309  Section 13: On-road Driving
    · Check traffic in all directions.

Do not stop, change gears, pass another vehicle, or change lanes while any part of your vehicle is in
the crossing.

If you are driving a bus, a school bus, or a vehicle displaying placards, you should be
prepared to practice the following procedures at a railroad crossing:

    · As the vehicle approaches a railroad crossing, activate the four-way flashers.
    · Stop the vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail.
    · Listen and look in both directions along the track for an approaching train and for signals

         alerting the approach of a train. If driving a bus, you may also be asked to open the window
         and door prior to crossing tracks.
    · Keep hands on the steering wheel as the vehicle crosses the tracks.
    · Do not stop, change gears, or change lanes while any part of your vehicle is going across the
         tracks.
    · Four-way flashers should be deactivated after the vehicle crosses the tracks.
    · Continue to check mirrors and traffic.

Not all driving road test routes will have a railroad crossing. You may be asked to explain and show
the proper railroad crossing procedures to the examiner at a simulated location.

13.1.9 ­ Bridge, Overpass, and Sign

After driving under an overpass, the examiner may ask you what the posted clearance or height was.
After going over a bridge, the examiner may ask you what the posted weight limit was. If your test
route does not have a bridge or overpass, you may be asked about another traffic sign. When asked,
be prepared to name and explain to the examiner any traffic sign which may appear on the route.

13.1.10 ­ Student Discharge (School Bus)

If you are applying for a School Bus endorsement, you will be asked to practice a student discharge.
Please refer to section 10 of this manual.
As you approach the student pick up, you must:

    · Decelerate and approach at a slow speed while continuing to check traffic.
    · Activate amber warning lights and right turn signals.
    · Move as far as possible to the right on the traveled part of the roadway.
    · Recheck traffic.
As you stop for the student discharge, you must:

    · Bring the school bus to a complete stop at least 10 feet away from students at the stop.

310  Section 13: On-road Driving
    · Place the transmission in Neutral or Park and set the parking brake.
    · Activate the stop arm and red warning lights.
When discharging students, you must:
    · Communicate to students.
    · Check traffic.
    · Open the student door.
    · Check for students.
When students are crossing, you must:
    · Check traffic.
    · Communicate to students.
    · Check for students.
When resuming from the student discharge, you must:
    · Check all mirrors.
    · Turn off warning lights and stop arm.
    · Close the door
    · Check traffic.
    · Accelerate away from the stop area.

13.1.11 ­ General Driving Behaviors

You will be scored on your overall performance in the following general driving behavior categories:

13.1.11(A) ­ CLUTCH USAGE (FOR MANUAL TRANSMISSION)
    · Always use the clutch to shift.
    · If your vehicle has an unsynchronized manual transmission, you must double-clutch when
         shifting. Do not rev or lug the engine.
    · Do not ride clutch to control speed, coast with the clutch depressed, or "pop" the clutch.

13.1.12(B) ­ GEAR USAGE (FOR MANUAL TRANSMISSION)
    · Do not grind or clash gears.
    · Select gear that does not rev or lug engine. Do not shift in turns and intersections.

311  Section 13: On-road Driving
13.1.13(C) ­ BRAKE USAGE
    · Do not ride or pump the brakes.
    · Do not brake harshly. Brake smoothly using steady pressure.

13.1.14(D) ­ LANE USAGE
    · Do not put your vehicle over curbs, sidewalks, or lane markings.
    · Stop behind stop lines, crosswalks, or stop signs.
    · Complete a turn in the proper lane on a multiple lane road (vehicle should finish a left turn in
         the lane directly to the right of the center line).
    · Finish a right turn in the right-most (curb) lane.
    · Move to or remain in the right-most lane unless the lane is blocked.

13.1.15 ­ STEERING
    · Do not over or under steer the vehicle.
    · Always keep both hands on the steering wheel unless you are shifting.
    · Once you have completed the shift, return both hands to the steering wheel.

13.1.16 ­ REGULAR TRAFFIC CHECKS
    · Check traffic regularly.
    · Check mirrors regularly.
    · Check mirrors and traffic before, while in and after an intersection.
    · Scan and check traffic in high volume areas and areas where pedestrians are expected to be
         present.

13.1.17 ­ USE OF TURN SIGNALS
    · Use turn signals properly.
    · Activate turn signals when required. Activate turn signals at appropriate times.
    · Cancel turn signals after finishing a turn or lane change.

312  Section 13: On-road Driving
Section 14: Slang Dictionary

Term           Definition                                                Sections Term is
Jug Handle                                                               Mentioned In
Button Hook
Brake Fanning  A maneuver where the driver moves left before turning     Section 2.7.6
Rig            right. This can confuse other drivers on the road and     Section 6.1.6
               cause them to drive into the tractor-trailer's turning
Semitrailer    zone which could cause a crash.

               A maneuver where the driver keeps the truck's wheels      Section 2.7.6
               close to the curb during the approach of a right turn     Section 6.1.6
               and swings wide after starting the turn. This helps
               avoid crashes with oncoming traffic and is the preferred
               method of turning.

               A braking technique where the driver intermittently       Section 5.3
               applies and releases the brakes to allow the breaks to
               cool as the vehicle slows.

               A large truck with a semi-trailer, which is a combination Section 2.7.1

               of a truck tractor and one or more semi-trailers used to

               transport freight.                                        Section 6.1

                                                                         Section 6.4

                                                                         Section 6.5.2

                                                                         Section 7.2

                                                                         Section 7.4

               A heavy-duty truck with a tractor unit and a detachable Section 4.1.1
               trailer. The truck unit usually has a cab.

                                                                                            Section 6.1.3

                                                                                            Section 6.4

                                                                                            Section 7.2.1

313                                                                      Section 14: Slang Dictionary
Low Slung          The name given to the open deck trailer with           Section 2.15.6
                   heightened front and back ends and a lower-middle      Section 6.1.3
                   well area usually measuring between 26 and 30 feet in
                   length. These trailers are often used to help keep a
                   load within legal height limits.

Lowboy             The name given to the open deck trailer with           Section 2.15.6
                   heightened front and back ends and a lower-middle      Section 6.1.3
                   well area that usually measures between 26 and 30
                   feet in length. These trailers are often used to help
                   keep a load within legal height limits.

Car Carrier        A specialized vehicle designed to transport multiple   Section 2.15.6
                   cars simultaneously                                    Section 6.1.3

Moving Van         A vehicle designed to carry cargo that is low to the   Section 2.15.6
                   ground. Commonly used for transporting furniture,      Section 6.1.3
                   appliances, and other heavy or bulky cargo

Possum-belly       A trailer that is typically designed with an open top and Section 2.15.6

                   a sloped under-deck storage area, allowing for more

                   cargo capacity.                                        Section 6.1.3

Livestock Trailer  A specialized vehicle designed for the transportation of Section 2.15.6

                   animals such as cattle, sheep, pigs, horses, and

                   poultry.                                               Section 6.1.3

Trailer Hand Valve A hand-operated lever used to control the trailer brakes Section 6.2.1

Trolley Valve      A hand-operated lever used to control the trailer brakes Section 6.2.1
                                                                                                Section 6.5.2
                                                                                                Section 7.4.1

Johnson Bar        A hand-operated lever used to control the trailer brakes Section 6.2.1

314                                                                       Section 14: Slang Dictionary
Shut-off valves    Type of valve used on connections to close off the      Section 6.2.7
                   connection                                              Section 6.5.2
                                                                           Section 7.2.1
                                                                           Section 7.3.1
                                                                           Section 7.4.1

Cut-out cocks      Type of valve used on high pressure connections to      Section 6.2.7
                   close off the connection

Dollies            Enable the connection of multiple trailers to a single  Section 2.18.2
                   truck, creating what is known as a road train           Section 2.18.3
                   configuration.                                          Section 5.1.15
                                                                           Section 6.2.8
                                                                           Section 6.3.1
                                                                           Section 7.1.8
                                                                           Section 10.6.1

Anti-lock braking  A braking system that prevents the wheels from          Section 2.1.5
system (ABS)       locking-up during braking, allowing the driver to keep  Section 5.1.15
                   steering control and stability.                         Section 5.3
                                                                           Section 5.4.2
                                                                           Section 6.3
                                                                           Section 10.6
                                                                           Section 11.1.1

315                                                                        Section 14: Slang Dictionary
Electronic Control  Acts as the brain of the truck engine, managing and        Section 2.18.1
Unit (ECU)          coordinating various electronic systems such as fuel       Section 2.18.3
                    injection control, ignition timing, emission control, and  Section 5.1.15
                    engine diagnostics. Also known as the Engine Control       Section 6.3.1
                    Module (ECM)

Converter dolly     Designed to connect multiple trailers to a semi-truck      Section 6.2.6
                    and typically consists of a fifth wheel coupling axle(s),  Section 7.2
                    and a tow bar that links the first trailer to the second   Section 7.3.1
                    one, allowing for efficient hauling of more than one
                    trailer.

Blade for leaf      A leaf spring is a part of a commercial vehicle's          Section 2.1.3
spring
                    suspension system. Each layer of a leaf spring is called

                    a blade                                                    Section 11.5.2

International       A cooperative agreement among the United States and        Section 1.6
Registration Plan   Canadian provinces that simplifies the registration
(IRP)               process for commercial vehicles working across
                    multiple jurisdictions.

Dead axle or non- A type of axle that does not get power from the engine Section 7.1.6

driven Axle         and primarily supports the vehicle's weight.

Wheel chocks        A wedge device used in the trucking industry to prevent Section 5.4.8

                    vehicles from rolling during the loading and unloading

                    processes to stabilize the tires and vehicles.             Section 6.2.1

                                                                               Section 6.2.8

                                                                               Section 6.4.1

                                                                               Section 11

Wig wag             A device that shows low air pressure in air brake          Section 5.1.11
                    systems on trucks, helping drivers to stop safely.

316                                                                            Section 14: Slang Dictionary
Jackknife/Jacknife  Term used when a trailer of a truck swings out to the     Section 2.13.2
                    side, resembling a folded pocket knife. Can happen for    Section 2.18.4
                    various reasons, such as improper braking, mechanical     Section 2.18.5
                    failures, speeding, and extreme weather conditions.

                                                                              Section 2.18.8

                                                                              Section 2.19.1

                                                                              Section 5.4.2

                                                                              Section 6.1.3

                                                                              Section 6.1.5

                                                                              Section 6.2.1

                                                                              Section 6.3.2

                                                                              Section 7.1.4

                                                                              Section 8.3

Straight truck      Single-frame design where the cab and cargo area are Section 1.2.1

                    permanently attached and all axles are connected to

                    one frame, making one solid unit.                         Section 2.18.6

                                                                              Section 2.19.1

                                                                              Section 5.1.14

                                                                              Section 5.4.2

                                                                              Section 6.1.1

                                                                              Section 6.1.7

                                                                              Section 7.1.1

                                                                              Section 11.6.2

Brake Lag           The delay in response of the braking system after the     Section 5.4.4
                    driver applies the brake pedal. This is a common issue
                    with air brake systems and will increase the distance it
                    takes to stop a commercial vehicle.

317                                                                           Section 14: Slang Dictionary
Brake fade  When your brakes lose effectiveness due to               Section 2.16.3
Power unit  overheating                                              Section 2.17.3
                                                                     Section 5.4.5
Cargo Tank
            The self-propelled, motorized vehicle that can generate Section 1.2.2

            its own power. Can tow freight as a combination

            vehicle or operating independently.                      Section 1.6

                                                                     Section 2.1.5

                                                                     Section 3.2.1

                                                                     Section 9.5.4

                                                                     Section 9.6.8

                                                                     Section 11.1.2

                                                                     Section 11.6.1

                                                                     Section 11.6.2

            A type of bulk packaging used for the transportation of  Section 2.23.2
            hazardous materials. These tanks are commonly used       Section 8.2.6
            to carry products like gasoline or other flammable       Section 9
            liquids and typically feature a heavy, built-up top to   Section 9.2.1
            contain small spills.

                                                                     Section 9.3.3

                                                                     Section 9.3.6

                                                                     Section 9.3.11

                                                                     Section 9.4

                                                                     Section 9.5

                                                                     Section 9.6.6

                                                                     Section 9.6.11

                                                                     Section 9.7.4

                                                                     Section 9.8

318                                                                  Section 14: Slang Dictionary
For More Information

For more information, visit www.mva.maryland.gov

6601 Ritchie Highway
Glen Burnie, MD 21062
410-768-7000
TTY for the Hearing Impaired: 1-800-492-4575

        MarylandMVA
        @md_mva
        MD_MVA

Maryland Commercial Driver's License Manual

DL-151 (05/26)

This material is based upon work supported by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration under Cooperative Agreement No. DTFH61-97-X-00017. Any opinions, findings,
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the Author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the view of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration.

COPYRIGHT © 2022 AAMVA. All rights reserved
This material has been created for and provided to State Driver License Agencies (SDLAs) by AAMVA for the purpose of
educating Driver License applicants (Commercial or Non-Commercial). Permission to reproduce, use, distribute or sell this
material has been granted to SDLAs only. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system
without express written permission from the author / publisher. Any unauthorized reprint, use, distribution or sale of this
material is prohibited.
