 Commercial
Driver License

    Manual

      2005 CDL Testing System

                  Version: July 2014

                                  CDL Driver's Manual
                            COPYRIGHT © 2005 AAMVA

                                   All Rights Reserved
    This material is based upon work supported by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration under Cooperative Agreement No. DTFH61-97-X-00017. Any opinions,

  findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of
    the Author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the Federal Motor Carrier
                                           Safety Administration.

                                                                    COPYRIGHT © 2005 AAMVA. All rights reserved

This material has been created for and provided to State Driver License Agencies (SDLAs) by AAMVA for the purpose of educating Driver License
applicants (Commercial or Non-Commercial). Permission to reproduce, use, distribute or sell this material has been granted to SDLAs only. No part of
this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system without express written permission from the author / publisher. Any unauthorized reprint, use, distribution or
sale of this material is prohibited.
Human trafficking is modern-day slavery. Traffickers use force, fraud and coercion to control their victims. Any minor
engaged in commercial sex is a victim of human trafficking. Trafficking can occur in many locations, including truck
stops, restaurants, rest areas, brothels, strip clubs, private homes, etc. Truckers are the eyes and the ears of our
nation's highways. If you see a minor working any of those areas or suspect pimp control, call the National Hotline
and report your tip:

                                                      1-888-3737-888 (US)
                                                      1-800-222-TIPS (Canada)

For law enforcement to open an investigation on your tip, they need "actionable information." Specific tips helpful
when reporting to the hotline would include:

     Descriptions of cars (make, model, color, license plate number, etc.) and people (height, weight, hair color,

          eye color, age, etc.)

     Take a picture if you can.
     Specific times and dates (When did you see the event in question take place? What day was it?)
     Addresses and locations where suspicious activity took place

Trafficking Red Flags to Look for:

     Lack of knowledge of their community or whereabouts
     Not in control of own identification documents (ID/passport)
     Restricted or controlled communication--not allowed to speak for self
     Demeanor: fear, anxiety, depression, submissive, tense, nervous

Questions to Ask:

     Are you being paid?
     Are you being watched or followed?
     Are you free to leave? Come and go as you please?
     Are you physically or sexually abused? Are you or your family threatened? What is the nature of the threats?

Report by Email: Report@PolarisProject.org

Warning: Please do not approach traffickers. Call the hotline, and they will call the FBI and local police to deal with
them and rescue the victims. Approaching traffickers is not only dangerous for you and their victims but could lead to
problems in the eventual prosecution of traffickers. Go to www.truckersagainsttrafficking.org for more information.
Who must have a South Dakota Commercial Driver's License?
You must have a South Dakota Commercial Driver License to operate any of the following Commercial Motor Vehicles
(CMV'S):

 A single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 26,001 or more pounds.
 A trailer with a GVWR of 10,001 or more pounds if the gross combination weight rating is 26,001 or more pounds.
 A vehicle designed to transport 16 or more persons (including the driver).
 Any size vehicle which requires hazardous materials placards or is carrying material listed as a select agent or toxin in 42

  CFR Part 73.

Who Does Not Need A South Dakota Commercial Driver License?

 Operators serving in the United States military, operating commercial vehicles in pursuit of military purposes.
 Operators of emergency firefighting equipment necessary to the preservation of life, property, or the execution of

   emergency governmental functions performed under emergency conditions that aren't subject to normal traffic regulation.
 Operators of rental transporting equipment used as personal family use vehicles.
 Operators of recreation vehicles used as personal family recreational use vehicles.
 Operators involved in farm to market transportation movements, at least 18 years of age holding a valid operator's license,

   limited to those operators of a farm vehicle:
         (a) Controlled and operated by a farmer,
         (b) Used to transport either agricultural products, farm machinery, or farm supplies to or from a farm, and
         (c) Not used in the operations of a common or contract motor carrier,
         (d) Used within 150 miles of a person's farm.

 Operators of Covered Farm Vehicles:
       1. Means a straight truck or articulated vehicle
         (a) Registered in the state with a farm license plate or farm sticker issued by the State of registration that allows law
              enforcement officials to identify it as a farm vehicle
         (b) Operated by the owner or operator of a farm or ranch, or an employee or family member of an owner or operator
              of a farm or ranch,
         (c) Used to transport agricultural commodities, livestock, machinery or supplies to or from a farm or ranch,
         (d) Not used in for-hire motor carrier operations; however, for-hire motor carrier operations do not include the
              operation of a vehicle by a tenant pursuant to a crop share farm lease agreement to transport the landlord's
              portion of the crops under that agreement.
         (e) With a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating, whichever is greater, of 26,001 pounds or less may
              utilize the exemptions anywhere in the unites States; or
         (f) With a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating, whichever is greater, of more than 26,001 pounds may
              utilize the exemptions anywhere in the State of registration or across State lines within 150 air miles of the farm or
              ranch with respect to which the vehicle is being operated.

Who Can Not Get A South Dakota Commercial Driver License?

 Persons under the age of 18.
 Persons who have a license under suspension, revocation, cancellation, or disqualification.
 Persons who can't successfully complete licensing requirements under `Driver Application Procedures' of this manual.
 Persons who aren't a resident of South Dakota.
 Persons who have accumulated child support arrearages of $1,000 or more.
 The minimum age to qualify for interstate commerce in a commercial vehicle is 21 years of age.
 The minimum age to qualify for intrastate commerce in a commercial vehicle is 18 years of age.

Knowledge and Specialized Tests
Every driver who wants a CDL must pass the general knowledge test. A driver who does not obtain a passing score on the
general knowledge test cannot be issued a Commercial Learner's Permit or take the skills test. You must have a score of
80% or better to pass each test.

       The General Knowledge Test (taken by all applicants) consists of 50 multiple choice questions.

The Specialized Tests measure the level of knowledge a driver is required to have and are administered based upon the
type of vehicle the applicant wishes to drive and type of cargo to be transported.

       The Air Brakes Test must be taken if your vehicle has air brakes, including air over hydraulic brakes. The test
           consists of 25 multiple choice questions.

       The Combination Vehicles Test is required if you want to drive combination vehicles. The test consists of 20
           multiple choice questions.
      The Passenger Transport Test must be taken by all bus driver applicants. The test consists of 20 multiple choice
          questions.

      The Double/Triples Test is required if you want to pull double or triple trailers. The test consists of 20 multiple
          choice questions.

      The Tank Vehicle Test is required if you want to haul a liquid or liquefied gases in bulk. The test consists of 20
          multiple choice questions.

      The Hazardous Materials Test is required if you want to haul hazardous materials or waste that are required to be
          placarded as defined in 49 CFR 383.5. In order to obtain this endorsement you are also required to pass a
          Transportation Security Administration (TSA) background check and show proof of citizenship or permanent
          residency. The test consists of 30 multiple choice questions.

      The School Bus Test is required by school bus drivers. The test consists of 20 multiple choice questions.

Tests will only be given once per day; to retest you will need to return to an exam station the next business day.

What is Considered a Passing Score?
You must have a score of 80% or better to pass each test.

Commercial Drivers Learner's Permit (CLP)
A commercial learner's permit may be issued to an individual 18 years of age who holds a valid Class 1 or Class 2
operator's license.

The CLP must be valid for no more than 180 days from the date of issuance. The CLP may be renewed once in the 1
year period from the issuance date for an additional 180 days without requiring the CLP holder to retake the general and
specialized knowledge tests.

The holder of a CLP may, unless otherwise disqualified, drive a commercial motor vehicle only if accompanied by the
holder of a CDL, who is 21 years of age, has a valid license for a type of vehicle driven, and occupies a seat beside the
individual or directly behind if in a passenger vehicle for the purpose of giving instruction in driving the commercial motor
vehicle.

A CLP holder with a passenger or school bus endorsement are prohibited from operating a commercial motor vehicle or
school bus carrying passengers. A CLP holder with a tank endorsement may only operate an empty tank vehicle and is
prohibited from operating any tank vehicle that previously contained hazardous materials that has not been purged of any
residue.

A 14 day waiting period is required between the issue date of the CLP and to the date it can be converted to a commercial
driver's license.

Third Party Testing
The State has authorized persons, employers, training facilities, departments, and other agencies to administer the skills
tests. The tests given by the third party are the same as those, which would otherwise be given by the State. For more
information on Third Party Testing please contact:

          State of South Dakota
          Dept. of Public Safety - Driver Licensing
          (605) 773-6883 or 1-800-952-3696 or see a list of Third Party Testers on our website at:
          http://dps.sd.gov

Skills Tests
After passing the required knowledge test(s), you can be issued a commercial learner's permit and then take the CDL skills
tests. The commercial learner's permit must contain all endorsements and restrictions necessary to complete the skills test.
There are three types of general skills that will be tested: pre-trip inspection, basic vehicle control, and on-road driving. You
must take these tests in the type of vehicle for which you wish to be licensed.

Scores for the passed segments of the skills tests are only valid during the initial issuance of the CLP. If the CLP is renewed,
all three segments of the skills test must be retaken.

The third party examiners must schedule tests 2 days in advance.
Pre-trip Vehicle Inspection
Purpose: To see if you know whether the vehicle is safe to drive.

Test Procedure: You will be asked to do a pre-trip inspection of your vehicle and explain to the examiner what you would
inspect and why. The examiner will mark on a scoring form each item that you correctly inspect or explain. This manual tells
you what you need to inspect.

Basic Vehicle Control
Purpose: To evaluate your basic skills in controlling the vehicle.

Set-Up: The test set-up consists of various exercises marked out by lines, traffic cones, or something similar. The exercises
may include moving the vehicle forward, backing, or turning maneuvers.

The examiner will explain to you how each exercise is to be done. You will be scored on how well you stay within the
exercise boundaries and how many pull-ups you make.

Road Test
Purpose: to evaluate your ability to drive safely in a variety of on-the-road situations.

Test Procedure: The test drive is taken over a route specified by the examiner. It may include left and right turns,
intersections, railway crossings, curves, up and down grades, rural or semi-rural roads, city multi-lane streets, and
expressway driving.

You will drive over the test route following instructions given by the examiner. The examiner will score specific tasks such as
turns, merging into traffic, lane changes, and speed control at specific places along the route. The examiner will also score
whether you correctly do tasks such as signaling, searching for hazards, controlling speed, and lane positioning

            DOCUMENT REQUIREMENTS (photo copies are not acceptable)

Renewal of a driver license or ID card (must have a star in upper right corner). If your license or ID doesn't have a star
please follow the directions below for a new license or ID card:

     1. South Dakota driver license or ID card (with star in upper right corner)
     2. Two documents proving your residential address (must be less than one year old)
     3. Non-US citizens and transfers from other states must provide proof of lawful status in the U.S. (such as U.S. certified

          birth certificate, valid U.S. passport/passport card, certificate of citizenship/naturalization, permanent resident card,
          employment authorization card, or foreign passport with visa/I-94)
     4. If your name has changed you will need to provide proof of the name change (marriage certificate, divorce decree, or
          court order)
For information about online renewal (available every other renewal period) go to www.dps.sd.gov

Replacement of a South Dakota driver license or ID card (had a star in upper right corner):
     1. U.S. certified birth certificate, valid U.S. passport/passport card, certificate of citizenship/naturalization, valid
          permanent resident card, valid employment authorization document, or foreign passport with U.S. visa/I-94
     2. Second document proving identity (such as social security card, W-2 form, military ID, tribal ID, or other document
          approved by examiner)
     3. Two documents proving your residential address (must be less than one year old)
     4. Name Change: If you need to change your name from what was on your last license or ID you will need to provide
          proof of the name change (marriage certificate, divorce decree, or court order)

To request a duplicate online (once per renewal period) go to www.dps.sd.gov. Name changes cannot be done online.

New South Dakota driver license or ID card (includes transfer from another state*)
     1. One document proving your date of birth, identity and lawful status or presence. If possible, select a
          document that has your current full legal name to avoid documenting any name change.
      Valid, unexpired U.S. passport or U.S. passport card
      Certified copy of a birth certificate issued by a state of the United States. It must be a certified copy and have the
          stamp or raised seal of the issuing authority. A hospital-issued certificate is not acceptable. A certified birth certificate
          issued by Puerto Rico must be certified as being issued on or after July 1, 2010.
      Consular Report of Birth Abroad issued by the U.S. Department of State (Form FS-240, DS-1350 or FS-545)
      Certificate of Naturalization (Form N-550, N-570 or N-578)
 Certificate of Citizenship (Form N-560, N-561 or N-645)
 Unexpired Permanent Resident Card (Form I-551)
 Unexpired Employment Authorization Document (Form I-766).
 Record of Arrival and Departure (I-94) with attached photo and stamped "Temporary Proof of Lawful Permanent

     Resident"
 Record of Arrival and Departure (I-94) stamped "Refugee," "Parolee" or "Asylee"
 Unexpired foreign passport accompanied by the approved I-94 documenting applicant's most recent admittance into

     the United States
 Valid foreign passport stamped "Processed for I-551"
 Permit to Reenter the United States (I-327)
 Refugee Travel Document (I-571)

*Transfer of a federally compliant driver license or ID from another state requires the documents listed under "Renewal of
a driver license or ID card (must have a star in upper right corner)" above.

2. Check your name. Is your current full legal name different from the name listed on the identity document you are
     providing in step 1? Were you previously issued a South Dakota driver license or ID card with a name different from
     that listed on the identity document in step 1? If you answered yes to one or both of the questions above, you
     must document your name change. If not, go to step 3.

To document your name change, bring documents that connect the name on the identity document you selected to your
current full legal name. Select the documents you will use (this can be more than one if needed to connect the name listed
on your identity document to your current name). Certified marriage certificate

                 Court order under petition for name change
                 Court order for name change in a divorce decree or decree of annulment
                 Court order for name change in a decree of adoption
     Any marriage certificate must be issued by the state office of vital statistics or equivalent agency in your state or
     country of marriage. It must be a certified copy and have the stamp or raised seal of the issuing authority. A church,
     chapel or similarly issued certificate is not acceptable.

Any court order must contain your prior full legal name, your court-ordered full legal name and your date of birth;
and be stamped with the official court seal (date stamps and file stamps are not the official court seal).
Photocopies and faxes are not acceptable.

3. Document your Social Security number (SSN). Select one document you will use that contains your current
     name and SSN. (We are unable to accept any document except what is listed below, including Medicare cards)

 Social Security card (the social security card stub or metal cards are not acceptable)
 W-2 form
 Social Security Administration 1099 form
 Non-Social Security Administration 1099 form
 Pay stub or statement with your name and full Social Security number on it
 I am a temporary foreign national not authorized for employment. (You do not have to document a SSN, but South

     Dakota will verify your USCIS number. Make sure you are not authorized for employment. If you are eligible for
     employment but do not have a SSN, you are required to obtain and present one.

4. Two documents proving your residential address (less than one year old). A parent's proof of address is

acceptable for a minor child.

 Utility bill                                       If you are unable to provide proof of residency

 Pay stub or earnings statement                    please see a list of address exceptions on our

 Rent receipt                                      website at www.dps.sd.gov or call 1-605-773-

 Phone bill                                        6883

 Transcript or report card from accredited school   Mail with post office box addresses are acceptable
 Bank statement                                         in areas not assigned a street or 911 address

 Mortgage document

 Tax document

 Homeowners/rent's insurance policy

 Other items with your address can be reviewed by

the examiner
Veterans
Veterans who have been honorably discharged from the military have the option of adding the word "Veteran" to the front
of their South Dakota driver license or identification card. In addition to the documents listed above, they will need to
present one of the following:

 DD-214 form which shows their honorable discharge status from active duty
 Present a certificate signed by a county or tribal veteran's service officer verifying their status
 DD Form 2 (Retired)
 DD Form 2A (Reserve Retired)

Note to current or new CDL applicants: If you are required to carry a medical examiners certificate (aka DOT medical card)
you must show a valid card at the driver exam station.

If you are unable to obtain any of the required documents please contact our office to see if exceptions are
available:

E-mail:   DPSLicensingInfo@state.sd.us (please include your first and last name)
Phone:
Address:  1-605-773-6883  Website Address: www.dps.sd.gov

          South Dakota Driver Licensing Program, 118 W. Capitol Ave., Pierre, SD 57501
South Dakota Classification System

         1 Car/Truck
         2 Car/Truck/Motorcycle
         3 Motorcycle
         A Combination Vehicle over 26,000
         B Heavy Straight Vehicle over 26,000
         C Commercial Vehicle Under 26,000

South Dakota Endorsements
         (T) Double/Triple Trailers- Many drivers who are qualified to drive Class A vehicles may
         wish to pull double or triple trailers. Research shows that considerable additional knowledge
         and skill is necessary to safely pull double and triple trailers in various traffic conditions and
         driving environments. Consequently, adding the endorsement to the licenses of Class A
         drivers is necessary if they wish to pull double or triple trailers. A special knowledge
         examination on the problems associated with pulling multiple trailers must be passed.
         (P) Passengers- Drivers who wish to drive a vehicle having a design capacity to carry 16 or
         more people, including the driver, must add a passenger endorsement to their CDL. They
         must pass a special knowledge examination on safety considerations when transporting
         passengers and must pass skills tests in a passenger vehicle. The endorsement applies to
         applicants who wish to drive a bus in any class (A, B, or C).
         (N) Tank Vehicles- Drivers of vehicles that are used to haul liquids or gaseous materials in
         permanent tanks having a rating capacity of 450 liters (119 gallons) or in portable tanks
         having a rating capacity of 1,000 gallons or more must have specialized knowledge and skills
         to drive safely. The current regulation [CFR part 383.5 tank vehicle] does not specify the
         rating capacity of permanent tanks. Therefore FMCSA has defined a permanent tank using a
         hazardous materials requirement [CFR part 171.8] that specifies permanent tanks as having
         a rating capacity of 450 liters (119 gallons). Applies to Class A, B and C vehicles. Liquids in
         bulk cause driving control problems because the cargo is heavy, prone to shifting, and has a
         high center of gravity. These drivers must add an endorsement to their license showing they
         have passed a special knowledge examination on the problems posed by large volume liquid
         cargos.
         (H) Hazardous Materials- Any driver, regardless of the class of their vehicle (A, B, or C)
         who wishes to haul hazardous materials or waste in amounts requiring placards must add a
         hazardous materials endorsement to their CDL. S/he must pass a special written examination
         on how to recognize, handle, and transport hazardous materials. Before the endorsement can
         be added to the license the driver must also pass a federal Transportation Security
         Administration background check which includes an application, fingerprinting and fee.
         (X) Combination Tank and Hazardous- Drivers who haul hazardous materials or hazardous
         waste in a tank vehicle must add an X endorsement to their CDL, showing that they have
         passed the special knowledge examinations for both tank vehicles and hazardous materials.
         (S) School Bus- Drivers who wish to drive a school bus, must add a school bus endorsement
         to their CDL. They must pass a special knowledge examination on safety considerations when
         transporting passengers in a school bus and must pass skills tests in a school bus. The
         endorsement applies to applicants who wish to drive a school bus in any class (A, B, or C).

If applying for Hazardous Materials endorsement duplicate or renewal you must provide a
valid U.S. passport, U.S. birth certificate, or Permanent Resident Card.
EFFECTIVE JULY 1st, 2015

Prior to                  SD License Restrictions
July 1,
 2015                     Now Commercial Learner's Permit Restrictions
                            P No passengers in a CMV
   B                        X No cargo in a tank CMV
   J                                   Commercial Driver License Restrictions
   K                        L No air brakes
   W                       M No Class A passenger vehicle
   V                       N No Class A or B passenger vehicle
                           W Seasonal CDL
   O                       V Medical Variance
   R                        E Automatic Transmission (new for CMV)
   G                        K Intrastate only
   F                       O No tractor-trailer CMV
   Q                        Z No Full Air Brake (air over hydraulic brakes)
   E                              Driver License Restrictions
   X                        B Corrective Lenses
   Z                       R Restricted Permit (6AM-10PM)
                           G No night driving
                           F Left outside rearview mirror
                            I No driving outside of town
                           A Automatic Transmission (Non-Commercial)
                            Y 50 mile radius of residence
                            C Special equipped vehicle
License Transfer

When applying to transfer a CLP/CDL from one state of domicile to a new state of domicile, an applicant shall
apply for a CLP/CDL from the new State of domicile within no more than 30 days. The applicant shall:

          Meet document requirements on page iv and v.

           Complete application and provide updated information for the Commercial Driver's License document.
           Surrender the CDL from the old state of domicile.

If an applicant wishes to transfer a hazardous materials endorsement the applicant must:
 Have completed a TSA security threat assessment;
 Successfully complete the hazardous materials endorsement knowledge test;
 Provide proof of citizenship or permanent residency.

License Renewal

When applying for renewal of a CLP/CDL, all applicants shall:
           Meet document requirements on page iv and v.
           Complete application and provide updated information for the CLP/CDL document.

If an applicant wishes to renew hazardous materials endorsement the applicant must:
     a) Have completed a TSA security threat assessment;
     b) Successfully complete the hazardous materials endorsement knowledge test;
     c) Provide proof of citizenship or permanent residency.

License Upgrade

When applying to operate a commercial motor vehicle in a different group or endorsement from the group or
endorsement in which the applicant already has a CDL, all persons shall:

           Provide the necessary certifications,
           Pass all tests specified for the new vehicle group and/or endorsements.

Seasonal Farm-Services CDL

Drivers who are seasonal employees of a farm-related service industry, such as custom harvesters, farm retail
outlet suppliers, agri-chemical businesses, and livestock feeders may be eligible for a "Seasonal/Restricted
Commercial License". The applicant for the "Seasonal CDL" must be 18 years old and have a good driving
record for the two most recent years and must have held a valid operator license for one year (this doesn't
include instruction permits or restricted licenses). Upon meeting these requirements all knowledge and skill
testing will be waived.

A "Seasonal CDL" allows the operator to operate only Class B and C Commercial vehicles within 150 miles from
the place of business or the farm currently being served, and the operator may not drive vehicles carrying any
placarded quantities of hazardous materials, except for the following:

          (1) Diesel fuel in quantities of 1,000 gallons or less,
          (2) Liquid fertilizers, such as plant nutrients, in vehicles or implements of husbandry with total capacities

                of 3,000 gallons or less, and,
          (3) Solid fertilizers, such as solid plant nutrients, that aren't transported with any organic substance.

A "Seasonal CDL" is valid for one 180-day period or two 90-day periods each calendar year.
                           License Expiration

A CDL expires on the licensee's birthday in the fifth year following the issuance of the license. Each license is
renewable 180 days prior to its expiration, unless the applicant is turning twenty-one, in which case their license
expires 30 days after their 21st birthday and they must wait until their birthday to renew their license.

Non-citizens will be issued a "Nonresident CDL" for the duration of their legal stay in the U.S. (not to exceed five
years or, if turning 21, 30 days after their 21st birthday).

Reciprocity

The holder of a valid CDL, which is not suspended, revoked, cancelled, or disqualified, may operate a
commercial motor vehicle in any State, Canada or Mexico.

Fees

The fee for a commercial driver license is $33.00. There is also a $15.00 fee for each endorsement to a
commercial license. A third party tester may charge up to $90.00 plus tax for each attempt to successfully
complete the commercial skills test.

Reinstatement Fee

A person whose license has been revoked, suspended, or disqualified is required by law to pay a license
reinstatement fee of $50.00 to $200.00 plus application fees when he/she is eligible to apply for a new license.
Tests may be required following a revocation, suspension, or disqualification.

For any other Driver License information CALL 1-605-773-6883 or check our website at http://dps.sd.gov.

Imminent Hazardous Disqualification

Upon notification from the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that a driver is an imminent hazard
(FMCSR 383.52)

In Addition While Driving a Commercial Motor Vehicle... if you refuse to submit to the requested chemical
analysis you will be immediately placed out of service for a period of 24 hours and will be disqualified from
operating a commercial motor vehicle for a period of one year under SDCL 32-12A-43 and 32-12A-46. Also, if
your chemical analysis discloses that you have been operating a commercial motor vehicle with an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by weight of alcohol in your blood in violation of SDCL 32-12A-44, your
commercial driver license will be disqualified for a period of one year.

Vehicle Registration and Title

Commercial vehicles are registered at the County Treasurer's office of the applicant's residence. If the vehicle is
being apportioned (prorated), application for registration is made to the Prorate Section of the Division of Motor
Vehicles. Commercial and prorate registrations are valid from January 1 to December 31. A certificate of title is
required to sell or transfer any vehicle. The title should be kept in a safe place, not in the vehicle. The
registration certificate must be carried in the vehicle at all times.

Financial Responsibility

Any operator who has had his license revoked or suspended following a conviction for NO INSURANCE, DWI,
VEHICULAR HOMICIDE, RECKLESS DRIVING (2nd in one-year period), OR A JUDGMENT must establish
proof of financial responsibility (a SR-22 form filed with the state by your auto insurance company) before he may
drive or re-register any vehicle in this State.

Construction and Maintenance Devices

Various traffic control devices are used in construction and maintenance work areas to direct drivers or
pedestrians safely through the work zone and to provide for the safety of the highway workers.

The most commonly used traffic control devices are signs, barricades, drums, cones, tubes, flashing arrow panels,
and flag-persons. Orange is the color for these devices.
Construction and Maintenance Signs
Construction and maintenance signs are used to notify drivers of unusual or potentially dangerous conditions in
or near work areas. Most signs in work areas are diamond shape, but a few are rectangular.

Channelizing Devices
Barricades, vertical panels, drums, cones, and tubes are the most commonly used devices to alert drivers of
unusual or potentially dangerous conditions in highway and street work areas and to guide drivers safely
through the work zone. At night they are often equipped with flashing or steady burn lights.

Barricade         Panel  Cone  Tube  Drum         Barricade

The diagonal stripes on the barricade or vertical panel, guide the driver towards the direction to which traffic is
to pass. Stripes sloping downward to the right means the driver should bear to the right. Conversely, stripes
sloping downward to the left means bear to the left.

Pass to the Left               Pass to the Right

Flashing Arrow Panels

Large flashing or sequencing arrow panels may be used in work zones both day and night to guide drivers into
certain traffic lanes and to inform them that part of the road or street ahead of them is closed.
              Traffic Stop

                            Traffic Proceed

Flag persons

Flag persons are often provided in highway and street work zones to stop, slow, or guide traffic safely through
the area. Flag persons wear orange vests, shirts, or jackets and use stop/slow paddles or red flags to direct
traffic through work zones.

                       **************************************************

  Security Threat Assessment Procedures for Hazardous Materials Endorsement Applicants

New Endorsement: Federal Regulations require anyone applying for a new hazardous materials
endorsement to submit finger prints and obtain a security clearance from the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) prior to the issuance of the commercial driver license containing a hazardous materials
endorsement. To begin these process applicants need to make application and complete the written
hazardous materials test at a South Dakota driver exam station. The next step is to complete the application
for a security threat assessment background check and pay the $86.50 background check fee by either
logging onto https://universalenroll.dhs.gov or by calling 1-855-347-8371. The website or call center can
advise the applicant of the nearest location for fingerprinting. At the fingerprinting site applicants will need to
provide the staff with a receipt from the driver exam station showing the hazardous material endorsement test
was successfully passed and photo identification. When the background check is completed the
Transportation Security Administration will notify both the applicant and the state driver licensing authorities.
At that time the applicant may return to their local driver exam station to be issued a license with the
endorsement.

Renewal or Transfer of Endorsement: Applicants applying for renewal or transfer of a commercial driver
license containing a hazardous materials endorsement are required to obtain a security clearance from TSA.
For renewals or transfers you may start the background check process by applying online and paying the
background check fee of $86.50 at https://universalenroll.dhs.gov or through the call center at 1-855-347-
8371.

All Applicants: Anyone applying for a commercial driver license with a hazardous materials endorsement
must provide proof of citizenship or immigration status. The proof of citizenship or permanent residency must
be presented to the driver license examiner when you make a new application for a hazardous materials
endorsement, transfer or renew your driver license with a hazardous materials endorsement, apply for a
duplicate commercial driver license with a hazardous materials endorsement or reinstate a driver license with
a hazardous materials endorsement.

In order to comply with these requirements, the state of South Dakota requires one of the documents listed
below when you make application at a South Dakota Driver Exam Station for a commercial driver license with
a hazardous materials endorsement. This document is required in addition to any other documents that are
required for proof of identity.

US Citizen: Valid U.S. Passport; Certificate of birth that bears an official seal and was issued by a county,
state, municipal authority, or outlying possession of the United States; Certificate of Birth Abroad issued by the
United States Department of State (Form FS-545 or DS 1350); Certificate of Naturalization (Form N-550 or N-
570); or Certificate of United States Citizenship (Form N-560 or N-561)
Immigration Status Documentation*: Permanent Resident Card, Alien Registration Receipt Card (Form I-551);
Temporary I-551 stamp in Foreign Passport; Temporary I-551 stamp in form I-94, Arrival/Departure Record
with photograph of the bearer; Re-entry Permit Form I-327

All applicants are required to provide their social security number.

If you have a Hazardous Materials endorsement and you do not meet the Hazardous Materials qualification
requirements that follow, you must surrender your commercial driver license to a Driver Exam Station
immediately. When you surrender your commercial driver license you may be issued a commercial driver
license without a Hazardous Materials endorsement if you are otherwise qualified.

See Parts A, B and C below for information on disqualifying criminal offenses. In addition to the disqualifying
criminal offenses listed below, the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) may determine that an
applicant is not eligible for the HME based on analysis of the following:

a) Interpol and other international information, as appropriate.
b) Terrorist watch lists, other government databases and related information.
c) Any other information relevant to determining applicant eligibility or an applicant's identity.
TSA may also determine that an applicant is not eligible if the security threat assessment process reveals
extensive foreign or domestic criminal convictions, a conviction for a serious crime not listed in Part A or B
below (including some lesser included offenses of serious crimes; e.g. Murder/Voluntary Manslaughter), or a
period of foreign or domestic imprisonment that exceeds 365 consecutive days.

TSA may also determine that an applicant is not eligible based on analysis of records related to violations of
transportation security regulatory requirements. These include security-related offenses at an airport, on board
an aircraft, at a maritime port, in connection with air cargo, and other regulatory violations.

PART A: Permanent Disqualifying Criminal Offenses

An applicant will be disqualified if he or she was convicted, pled guilty (including `no contest'), or found not
guilty by reason of insanity for any of the following felonies regardless of when they occurred:

1. Espionage or conspiracy to commit espionage.
2. Sedition or conspiracy to commit sedition.
3. Treason or conspiracy to commit treason.
4. A federal crime of terrorism as defined in 18 U.S.C. 2332b(g), or comparable State law, or conspiracy to
commit such crime.
5. A crime involving a TSI (transportation security incident). Note: A transportation security incident is a
security incident resulting in a significant loss of life, environmental damage, transportation system disruption,
or economic disruption in a particular area, as defined in 46 U.S.C. 70101. The term "economic disruption"
does not include a work stoppage or other employee-related action not related to terrorism and resulting from
an employer-employee dispute.
6. Improper transportation of a hazardous material under 49 U.S.C. 5124 or a comparable state law.
7. Unlawful possession, use, sale, distribution, manufacture, purchase, receipt, transfer, shipping, transporting,
import, export, storage of, or dealing in an explosive or explosive device. An explosive or explosive device
includes an explosive or explosive material as defined in 18 U.S.C. 232(5), 841(c) through 841(f), and 844(j);
and a destructive device, as defined in 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(4) and 26 U.S.C. 5845(f).
8. Murder.
9. Threat or maliciously conveying false information knowing the same to be false, concerning the deliverance,
placement, or detonation of an explosive or other lethal device in or against a place of public use, a state or
government facility, a public transportations system, or an infrastructure facility.
10. Violations of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, 18 U.S.C. 1961, et seq., or a
comparable State law, where one of the predicate acts found by a jury or admitted by the defendant, consists
of one of the permanently disqualifying crimes.
11. Attempt to commit the crimes in items (1)-(4) of this section.
12. Conspiracy or attempt to commit the crimes in items (5)-(10) of this section.
Note: An applicant may apply for a waiver for any disqualifying offense listed under Part A, numbers 5 through
12 listed above.

PART B: Interim Disqualifying Criminal Offenses

Conviction for one of the following felonies is disqualifying if the applicant was convicted, pled guilty (including
`no contest'), or found not guilty by reason of insanity within 7 years of the date of the application; OR if the
applicant was released from prison after conviction within 5 years of the date of the application.

1. Unlawful possession, use, sale, manufacture, purchase, distribution, receipt, transfer, shipping, transporting,
delivery, import, export of, or dealing in a firearm or other weapon. A firearm or other weapon includes, but is
not limited to, firearms as defined in 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(3) or 26 U.S.C. 5 845(a), or items contained on the U.S.
Munitions Import List at 27 CFR 447.21.
2. Extortion.
3. Dishonesty, fraud, or misrepresentation, including identity fraud and money laundering, where the money
laundering is related to a crime listed in Parts A or B (except welfare fraud and passing bad checks).
4. Bribery.
5. Smuggling.
6. Immigration violations.
7. Distribution, possession w/ intent to distribute, or importation of a controlled substance.
8. Arson.
9. Kidnapping or hostage taking.
10. Rape or aggravated sexual abuse.
11. Assault with intent to kill.
12. Robbery.
13. Fraudulent entry into a seaport as described in 18 U.S.C. 1036, or a comparable State law.
14. Violations of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) under 18 U.S.C. 1961, et
seq., or a comparable State law, other than any permanently disqualifying offenses.
15. Voluntary Manslaughter.
16. Conspiracy or attempt to commit crimes in this section.
Note: An applicant may apply for a waiver for any disqualifying offense listed under Part B.

PART C: Under Want, Warrant or Indictment
A person will be disqualified if he or she is wanted or under indictment in any civilian or military jurisdiction for
a felony listed under Part A or Part B until the want or warrant is released or the indictment is dismissed.
Application Process

1. Complete the application for a security threat assessment background check by either logging onto
     https://universalenroll.dhs.gov or by calling 1-855-347-8371. There is an $86.50 background check fee
     that will need to be paid upon application.

2. Fingerprinting. Contact one of the following fingerprinting sites for an appointment. You must provide
     the fingerprinting site with identification (a state-issued driver license or identification card):

EMSI Sioux Falls         Right Turn Inc.
2221 Russell Street      124 East Dakota Ave
Sioux Falls, SD 57104    Pierre, SD 57501
Hours: Monday - Friday   Hours: Wednesday
8:30am ­ 4:30 pm         1pm -5pm
Preferred Appointments   Preferred Appointments
605-728-5999             605-773-4755

TekNetCorp
1727 W Main St Suite 4
Rapid City, SD 57702
Hours: Wednesday
10am-2pm
Preferred Appointments:
605-716-6582

Issuance of CDL with Hazardous Material Endorsement

When the background check is completed the Transportation Security Administration will notify both the
applicant and the state driver licensing authorities. At that time the applicant may return to their local driver
exam station, with proof of citizenship and proof of identity, to be issued a license with the endorsement.

All applicants for a hazardous material endorsement must complete a knowledge exam to obtain the
endorsement.

Hazardous Material Regulations (HMR) and regulations for CDL operation are found in Title 42 CFR part 1003 and Title 49
CFR parts 100 to 185 and 300 to 399. You can purchase a copy of the Code of Federal Regulations through your local
Government Printing Office bookstore and various industry publishers. Company offices often have copies of the rules for
sale or driver use.
Information is also available on the Transportation Security Administration's website at www.tsa.gov. Individuals and
operators with questions about the Patriot Act rule can e-mail patriotact@dhs.gov
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
                            Table of Contents

Introduction .........................................................................................................................................1-1
Driving Safely ...................................................................................................................................2-1
Transporting Cargo Safely ...............................................................................................3-1
Transporting Passengers Safely...............................................................................4-1
Air Brakes .............................................................................................................................................5-1
Combination Vehicles ............................................................................................................6-1
Doubles and Triples .................................................................................................................7-1
Tank Vehicles ..................................................................................................................................8-1
Hazardous Materials................................................................................................................9-1
School Bus ........................................................................................................................................10-1
Vehicle Inspection.....................................................................................................................11-1
Basic Vehicle Control Skills Test............................................................................12-1
On-Road Driving.........................................................................................................................13-1
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

    Section 1
INTRODUCTION

This Section Covers                                                                      Figure 1.1

 Commercial Driver License Tests                              NOTE: A bus may be Class A, B, or C depending on whether
 Medical Requirements                                                      the GVWR is over 26,001 pounds or is a combination
 Driver Disqualifications                                                  vehicle.
 Other Safety Rules
 International Registration Program

There is a federal requirement that each state have
minimum standards for the licensing of commercial
drivers.

This manual provides driver license testing
information for drivers who wish to have a
commercial driver license (CDL). This manual does
NOT provide information on all the federal and
state requirements needed before you can drive a
commercial motor vehicle (CMV). You may have to
contact your state driver licensing authority for
additional information.

You must have a CDL to operate:

Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) of 26,001 pounds or more.

A combination vehicle with a gross combination
weight rating (GCWR) of 26,001 or more pounds,
provided the GVWR of the vehicle(s) being towed is
in excess of 10,000 pounds.

A vehicle designed to transport 16 or more
passengers (including the driver).

Any size vehicle which requires hazardous material
placards or is carrying material listed as a select
agent or toxin in 42 CFR part 73. Federal
regulations through the Department of Homeland
Security require a background check and
fingerprinting for the Hazardous Materials
endorsement. Contact your local department of
driver licensing for more information.

(Your state may have additional definitions of
CMVs.)

To get a CDL, you must pass knowledge and skills
tests. This manual will help you pass the tests,
however, it is not a substitute for a truck driver
training class or program. Formal training is the
most reliable way to learn the many special skills
required for safely driving a large commercial
vehicle and becoming a professional driver in the
trucking industry. Figure 1.1 helps you determine if
you need a CDL

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-1
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

1.1 ­ Commercial Driver License Tests                         similar. The examiner will tell you how each control
                                                              test is to be done.
1.1.1 ­ Knowledge Tests
                                                              On-road Test. You will be tested on your skill to
You will have to take one or more knowledge tests,            safely drive your vehicle in a variety of traffic
depending on what class of license and what                   situations. The situations may include left and right
endorsements you need. The CDL knowledge                      turns, intersections, railroad crossings, curves, up
tests include:                                                and down grades, single or multi-lane roads,
                                                              streets, or highways. The examiner will tell you
The general knowledge test, taken by all                      where to drive.
applicants.
                                                              Figure 1.2 details which sections of this manual
The passenger transport test, taken by all bus                you should study for each particular class of
driver applicants.                                            license and for each endorsement.

The air brakes test, which you must take if your              What Sections Should You Study?
vehicle has air brakes, including air over hydraulic
brakes.                                                           LICENSE  ENDORSEMENT
                                                                  TYPE
The combination vehicles test, which is required
if you want to drive combination vehicles.                                                                                     School Bus
                                                                                                                       Passenger
The hazardous materials test, required if you                                                                   Tank Vehicles
want to haul hazardous materials as defined in 49                                                        Double / Triple
CFR 383.5. In order to obtain this endorsement                                                     Hazardous
you are also required to pass a Transportation                                                  Materials
Security Administration (TSA) background check.                                           Class C
                                                                                   Class B
The tank vehicle test, required if you want to haul                         Class A
any liquid or gaseous materials in a tank or tanks
having an individual rated capacity of more than              Sections to Study
119 gallons and an aggregate rated capacity of                1XXX
1,000 gallons or more that is either permanently or
temporarily attached to the vehicle or chassis                2XXX            XXX

The doubles/triples test, required if you want to             3XXX
pull double or triple trailers.
                                                              4                                   X
The School Bus test, required if you want to drive
a school bus.                                                 5* X X X        X

1.1.2 ­ Skills Tests                                          6X              XX
If you pass the required knowledge test(s), you can
take the CDL skills tests. There are three types of           7               X
general skills that will be tested: Vehicle inspection,
basic vehicle control, and on-road driving. You               8                                X
must take these tests in the type of vehicle for
which you wish to be licensed. Any vehicle that               9            X                   X
has components marked or labeled cannot be
used for the Vehicle Inspection Test.                         10                                     X

Vehicle Inspection. You will be tested to see if              11 X X X                            XX
you know whether your vehicle is safe to drive.
You will be asked to do a Vehicle inspection of               12 X X X                            XX
your vehicle and explain to the examiner what you
would inspect and why.                                        13 X X X                            XX

Basic Vehicle Control. You will be tested on your             *Study section 5 if you plan to operate vehicles
skill to control the vehicle. You will be asked to            equipped with air brakes.
move your vehicle forward, backward, and turn it
within a defined area. These areas may be marked                             Figure 1.2 ­ What to Study
with traffic lanes, cones, barriers, or something

Section 1 - Introduction                                                                          Page 1-2
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

1.2 ­ Medical Documentation                                   1.2.2 ­ Inter/Intrastate Commerce: Status Non-
Requirements                                                  excepted or Excepted?

Starting January 30, 2012 and no later than                   Once you decide whether you will operate in
January 30, 2014, if you are applying for a CDL               interstate commerce or intrastate commerce,
Permit; or are renewing, upgrading, adding                    you must decide whether you will operate (or
endorsements to a CDL; or transferring a CDL                  expect to operate) in a non-excepted or excepted
from another state, you are required to provide               status. This decision will tell you to which of the
information to your State Driver's License Agency             four types of commerce you must self-certify.
(SDLA) regarding the type of commercial motor
vehicle operation you drive in or expect to drive in          Interstate Commerce:
with your CDL. Drivers operating in certain types of
commerce will be required to submit a current                 You operate in excepted interstate commerce
medical examiner's certificate and/or any medical             when you drive a CMV in interstate commerce only
variance documents that you have been issued                  for the following excepted activities:
(i.e. Vision, Skills Performance or Diabetic waivers,
or other exemptions) to your SDLA to obtain a                 To transport school children and/or school staff
"certified" medical status as part of your driving            between home and school;
record. You must contact your State Driver
Licensing Agency (SDLA) to obtain information                 As Federal, State or local government employees;
regarding the requirement for submitting these
documents.                                                    To transport human corpses or sick or injured
                                                              persons;
If you are required to have a "certified" medical
status and fail to provide and keep up-to-date your           Fire truck or rescue vehicle drivers during
medical examiner's certificate you become "not-               emergencies and other related activities;
certified" and may lose your CDL.
                                                              Primarily in the transportation of propane winter
For the purpose of complying with the new                     heating fuel when responding to an emergency
requirements for medical certification, it is                 condition requiring immediate response such as
important to know how you are using the CMV.                  damage to a propane gas system after a storm or
The following information will help you decide how            flooding;
to self-certify:
                                                              In Response to a pipeline emergency condition
1.2.1 ­ Interstate or Intrastate Commerce                     requiring immediate response such as a pipeline
                                                              leak or rupture;
Do you, or will you, use a CDL to operate a CMV in
interstate or intrastate commerce?                            In custom harvesting on a farm or to transport farm
                                                              machinery and supplies used in the custom
Interstate commerce is when you drive a CMV:                  harvesting operation to and from a farm or to
                                                              transport custom harvested crops to storage or
From one State to another State or a foreign                  market;
country;
                                                              Beekeeper in the seasonal transportation of bees;
Between two places within a State, but during part
of the trip, the CMV crosses into another State or            Controlled and operated by a farmer, but is not a
foreign country; or                                           combination vehicle (power unit and towed unit),
                                                              and is used to transport agricultural products, farm
Between two places within a State, but the cargo              machinery or farm supplies (no placardable
or passengers are part of a trip that began or will           hazardous materials) to and from a farm and within
end in another State or foreign country.                      150 air-miles of the farm;

Intrastate commerce is when you drive a CMV                   As a private motor carrier of passengers for non-
within a State and you do not meet any of the                 business purposes ; or
descriptions above for interstate commerce.
                                                              To transport migrant workers.
If you operate in both intrastate commerce and
interstate commerce, you must choose interstate               If you answered yes to one or more of the above
commerce.                                                     activities as the only operation in which you drive,
                                                              you operate in excepted interstate commerce
                                                              and do not need a Federal medical examiner's
                                                              certificate.

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-3
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System   Intrastate non-excepted: I certify that I
                                                                   operate or expect to operate entirely in
If you answered no to all of the above activities,                 intrastate commerce, that I am subject to and
you operate in non-excepted interstate                             meet the medical requirements for my State;
commerce and are required to provide a current                     and that I am required to obtain a medical
medical examiner's certificate (49 CFR                             examiner's certificate.
391.45),commonly referred to as a medical
certificate or DOT card, to your State Driver                  Intrastate excepted: I certify that I operate or
Licensing Agency (SDLA). Most CDL holders who                      expect to operate entirely in intrastate
drive CMVs in interstate commerce are non-                         commerce, that I am not subject to the medical
excepted interstate commerce drivers.                              requirements for my State; and that I am not
                                                                   required to obtain a medical examiner's
If you operate in both excepted interstate                         certificate.
commerce and non-excepted interstate
commerce, you must choose non-excepted                        1.3 - CDL Disqualifications
interstate commerce to be qualified to operate in
both types of interstate commerce.                            1.3.1 ­ General

Intrastate Commerce:                                          You may not drive a commercial motor vehicle if
                                                              you are disqualified for any reason.
You operate in excepted Intrastate commerce
when you drive a CMV only in intrastate commerce              1.3.2 ­ Alcohol, Leaving the Scene of an
activities for which your State of licensure has              Accident, and Commission of a Felony
determined do not require you to meet the State's
medical certification requirements. (contact your             It is illegal to operate a CMV if your blood alcohol
SDLA about their requirements).                               concentration (BAC) is .04% or more. If you
                                                              operate a CMV, you shall be deemed to have
You operate in non-excepted intrastate                        given your consent to alcohol testing.
commerce when you drive a CMV only in
intrastate commerce and are required to meet your             You will lose your CDL for at least one year for a
State of licensure's medical certification                    first offense for:
requirements (contact your SDLA about their                   Driving a CMV if your blood alcohol concentration
requirements).                                                is .04% or higher.
                                                              Driving a CMV under the influence of alcohol.
If you operate in both excepted intrastate                    Refusing to undergo blood alcohol testing.
commerce and non-excepted intrastate                          Driving a CMV while under the influence of a
commerce, you must choose non-excepted                        controlled substance.
intrastate commerce.                                          Leaving the scene of an accident involving a CMV.
                                                              Committing a felony involving the use of a CMV.
1.2.3 ­ Self-Certification Statements                         Driving a CMV when the CDL is suspended.
                                                              Causing a fatality through negligent operation of a
When completing an application for your CDL, you              CMV.
will be required to check the box next to the
statement that describes your status. The actual              You will lose your CDL for at least three years if
statements on your application may vary from                  the offense occurs while you are operating a CMV
those shown below:                                            that is placarded for hazardous materials.

 Interstate non-excepted: I certify that I                    You will lose your CDL for life for a second offense.
     operate or expect to operate in interstate
     commerce, that I am subject to and meet the              You will lose your CDL for life if you use a CMV to
     Federal DOT medical card requirements under              commit a felony involving controlled substances.
     49 CFR part 391; and that I am required to
     obtain a medical examiner's certificate.

 Interstate excepted: I certify that I operate or
     expect to operate in interstate commerce, but
     engage exclusively in transportation or
     operations excepted under 49 CFR §§390.3(f),
     391.2, 391.68 or 398.3 from all or parts of the
     qualification requirements of 49 CFR part 391;
     and that I am not required to obtain a medical
     examiner's certificate.

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-4
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

You will be put out-of-service for 24 hours if you            For drivers who are not required to always stop,
have any detectable amount of alcohol under                   failing to slow down and check that the tracks are
.04%.                                                         clear of an approaching train.

1.3.3 ­ Serious Traffic Violations                            For drivers who are always required to stop, failing
                                                              to stop before driving onto the crossing.
Serious traffic violations are excessive speeding
(15 mph or more above the posted limit), reckless             For all drivers failing to have sufficient space to
driving, improper or erratic lane changes, following          drive completely through the crossing without
a vehicle too closely, traffic offenses committed in          stopping.
a CMV in connection with fatal traffic accidents,
driving a CMV without obtaining a CDL or having a             For all drivers failing to obey a traffic control device
CDL in the driver's possession, and driving a CMV             or the directions of an enforcement official at the
without the proper class of CDL and/or                        crossing.
endorsements.
                                                              For all drivers failing to negotiate a crossing
                                                              because of insufficient undercarriage clearance.

You will lose your CDL:                                       1.3.6 ­ Hazardous Materials Endorsement
                                                              Background Check and Disqualifications
For at least 60 days if you have committed two
serious traffic violations within a three-year period         If you require a hazardous materials endorsement
involving a CMV.                                              you will be required to submit your fingerprints and
                                                              be subject to a background check.
For at least 120 days for three or more serious
traffic violations within a three-year period involving       You will be denied or you will lose your hazardous
a CMV.                                                        materials endorsement if you:

1.3.4 ­ Violation of Out-of-Service Orders                    Are not a lawful permanent resident of the United
                                                              States.
You will lose your CDL:
                                                              Renounce your United States citizenship.
For at least 90 days if you have committed your
first violation of an out-of-service order.                   Are wanted or under indictment for certain felonies.

For at least one year if you have committed two               Have a conviction in military or civilian court for
violations of an out-of-service order in a ten-year           certain felonies.
period.
                                                              Have been adjudicated as a mental defective or
For at least three years if you have committed                committed to a mental institution.
three or more violations of an out-of-service order
in a ten-year period.                                         Are considered to pose a security threat as
                                                              determined by the Transportation Security
1.3.5 ­ Railroad-highway Grade Crossing                       Administration.
Violations
                                                              The background check procedures vary from
You will lose your CDL:                                       jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Your licensing agency
                                                              will provide you with all the information you need to
For at least 60 days for your first violation.                complete the required TSA background check
                                                              procedures.
For at least 120 days for your second violation
within a three-year period.                                   1.3.7 ­ Traffic Violations in Your Personal
                                                              Vehicle
For at least one year for your third violation within a
three-year period.                                            The Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act
                                                              (MCSIA) of 1999 requires a CDL holder to be
These violations include violation of a federal, state        disqualified from operating a commercial motor
or local law or regulation pertaining to one of the           vehicle if the CDL holder has been convicted of
following six offenses at a railroad-highway grade            certain types of moving violations in their personal
crossing:                                                     vehicle.

For drivers who are not required to always stop,
failing to stop before reaching the crossing if the
tracks are not clear.

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-5
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

If your privilege to operate your personal vehicle is         Your employer may not let you drive a commercial
revoked, cancelled, or suspended due to violations            motor vehicle if you have more than one license or
of traffic control laws (other than parking violations)       if you're CDL is suspended or revoked. A court
you will also lose your CDL driving privileges.               may fine the employer up to $5,000 or put him/her
                                                              in jail for breaking this rule.
If your privilege to operate your personal vehicle is
revoked, cancelled, or suspended due to alcohol,              All states are connected to one computerized
controlled substance or felony violations, you will           system to share information about CDL drivers.
lose your CDL for 1 year. If you are convicted of a           The states will check on drivers' accident records
second violation in your personal vehicle or CMV              to be sure that drivers do not have more than one
you will lose your CDL for life.                              CDL.

If your license to operate your personal vehicle is           You are not allowed to hold a mobile telephone to
revoked, cancelled, or suspended you may not                  conduct a voice communication or dial a mobile
obtain a "hardship" license to operate a CMV.                 telephone by pressing more than a single button
                                                              when driving.
1.4 ­ Other CDL Rules
                                                              You are not allowed to send or read text messages
There are other federal and state rules that affect           while driving.
drivers operating CMVs in all states. Among them
are:                                                          You must be properly restrained by a safety belt at
                                                              all times while operating a commercial motor
You cannot have more than one license. If you                 vehicle. The safety belt design holds the driver
break this rule, a court may fine you up to $5,000            securely behind the wheel during a crash, helping
or put you in jail and keep your home state license           the driver to control the vehicle and reduces the
and return any others.                                        chance of serious injury or death. If you do not
                                                              wear a safety belt, you are four times more likely to
You must notify your employer within 30 days of               be fatally injured if you are thrown from the vehicle.
conviction for any traffic violations (except parking).
This is true no matter what type of vehicle you               Your state may have additional rules that you must
were driving.                                                 also obey.

You must notify your motor vehicle licensing                  1.5 ­ International Registration Plan
agency within 30 days if you are convicted in any                    International Fuel Tax Agreement
other jurisdiction of any traffic violation (except
parking). This is true no matter what type of vehicle         If you operate a CDL required vehicle in interstate
you were driving.                                             commerce, the vehicle, with few exceptions, is
                                                              required to be registered under the International
You must notify your employer within two business             Registration Plan (IRP) and the International Fuel
days if your license is suspended, revoked, or                Tax Agreement (IFTA). These federally mandated
canceled, or if you are disqualified from driving.            programs provide for the equitable collection and
                                                              distribution of vehicle license fees and motor fuels
You must give your employer information on all                taxes for vehicles traveling throughout the 48
driving jobs you have held for the past 10 years.             contiguous United States and 10 Canadian
You must do this when you apply for a commercial              provinces.
driving job.
                                                              Under the IRP, jurisdictions must register
No one can drive a commercial motor vehicle                   apportioned vehicles which includes issuing
without a CDL. A court may fine you up to $5,000              license plates and cab cards or proper credentials,
or put you in jail for breaking this rule.                    calculate, collect and distribute IRP fees, audit
                                                              carriers for accuracy of reported distance and fees
If you have a hazardous materials endorsement                 and enforce IRP requirements.
you must notify and surrender your hazardous
materials endorsement to the state that issued
your CDL within 24 hours of any conviction or
indictment in any jurisdiction, civilian or military, for,
or found not guilty by reason of insanity of a
disqualifying crime listed in 49 CFR 1572.103; who
is adjudicated as a mental defective or committed
to a mental institution as specified in 49 CFR
1572.109; or who renounces his or her U. S.
citizenship;

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-6
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Registrant responsibilities under the Plan include             (iv) is used in combination, when the gross
applying for IRP registration with base jurisdiction,               Vehicle weight of such combination exceeds
providing proper documentation for registration,                    26,000 pounds (11,793.401 kilograms).
paying appropriate IRP registration fees, properly
displaying registration credentials, maintaining              While similar, the Qualified Motor Vehicle in IFTA
accurate distance records, and making records                 means a motor vehicle used, designed, or
available for jurisdiction review.                            maintained for transportation of persons or
                                                              property and:
The basic concept behind IFTA is to allow a
licensee (motor carrier) to license in a base                   1) Having two axles and a gross vehicle weight
jurisdiction for the reporting and payment of motor                   or registered gross vehicle weight exceeding
fuel use taxes.                                                       26,000 pounds or 11,797 kilograms; or
Under the IFTA, a licensee is issued one set of
credentials which will authorize operations through             2) Is used in combination, when the weight of
all IFTA member jurisdictions. The fuel use taxes                     such combination exceeds 26,000 pounds or
collected pursuant to the IFTA are calculated                         11,797 kilograms gross vehicle or registered
based on the number of miles (kilometers) traveled                    gross vehicle weight. Qualified Motor
and the number of gallons (liters) consumed in the                    Vehicle does not include recreational
member jurisdictions. The licensee files one                          vehicles.
quarterly tax return with the base jurisdiction by
which the licensee will report all operations through           If the vehicle you operate is registered under IRP
all IFTA member jurisdictions.                                  and you are a motor carrier licensed under IFTA,
                                                                then you are required to comply with the
It is the base jurisdiction's responsibility to remit           mandatory record keeping requirements for
the taxes collected to other member jurisdictions               operating the vehicle. A universally accepted
and to represent the other member jurisdictions in              method of capturing this information is through
the tax collection process, including the                       the completion of an Individual Vehicle Distance
performance of audits.                                          Record (IVDR), sometimes times referred to as a
                                                                Driver Trip Report. This document reflects the
An IFTA licensee must retain records to support                 distance traveled and fuel purchased for a
the information reported on the IFTA quarterly tax              vehicle that operates interstate under
return                                                          apportioned (IRP) registration and IFTA fuel tax
                                                                credentials.
The IRP registrant and the IFTA licensee may
be the vehicle owner or the vehicle operator.                 Although the actual format of the IVDR may vary, the
                                                              information that is required for proper record keeping
The requirement for acquiring IRP plates for a                does not.
vehicle and IFTA license for a motor carrier is
determined by the definitions from the IRP Plan               In order to satisfy the requirements for Individual
and the IFTA for Qualified Vehicle and Qualified              Vehicle Distance Records, these documents must
Motor Vehicle:                                                include the following information:

For purposes of IRP:                                          Distance

A Qualified Vehicle is (except as provided below)             Per Article IV of the IRP Plan
any Power Unit that is used or                                    (i) Date of trip (starting and ending)
intended for use in two or more Member                            (ii) Trip origin and destination ­ City and State
Jurisdictions and that is used for the transportation             or Province
of persons for hire or designed, used, or                         (iii) Route(s) of travel
maintained primarily for the transportation of                    (iv) Beginning and ending odometer or
property, and:                                                         hubometer reading of the trip
                                                                  (v) Total distance traveled
 (i) has two Axles and a gross Vehicle weight or                  (vi) In-Jurisdiction distance
      registered gross Vehicle weight in                          (vii) Power unit number or vehicle identification
                                                                        number.
 (ii) excess of 26,000 pounds (11,793.401
      kilograms), or                                          Fuel

 (iii) has three or more Axles, regardless of weight,         Per Section P560 of the IFTA Procedures Manual
      or                                                      .300 An acceptable receipt or invoice must
                                                              include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

                                                                  .005 Date of purchase
                                                                  .010 Seller's name and address

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-7
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

    .015 Number of gallons or liters purchased;               By completing this document in full and keeping all
    .020 Fuel type                                            records required by both the IRP and the IFTA, you
    .025 Price per gallon or liter or total amount of         will have ensured that you and your company are
                                                              in compliance with all State and Provincial laws
           sale                                               surrounding fuel and distance record keeping
    .030 Unit number or other unique vehicle                  requirements.

           identifier                                         The IVDR serves as the source document for the
    .035 Purchaser's name                                     calculation of fees and taxes that are payable to
                                                              the jurisdictions in which the vehicle is operated, so
An example of an IVDR that must be completed in               these original records must be maintained for a
its entirety for each trip can be found in Figure 1           minimum of four years.
below. Each individual IVDR should be filled out
for only one vehicle. The rules to follow when                In addition, these records are subject to audit by
trying to determine how and when to log an                    the taxing jurisdictions. Failure to maintain
odometer reading are the following:                           complete and accurate records could result in
                                                              fines, penalties and suspension or revocation of
      At the beginning of the day                             IRP registrations and IFTA licenses.
      When leaving the state or province
      At the end of the trip/day                              For additional information on the IRP and the
                                                              requirements related to the IRP, contact your base
Not only do the trips need to be logged, but the fuel         jurisdiction motor vehicle department or IRP, Inc.
purchases need to be documented as well. You                  the official repository for the IRP. Additional
must obtain a receipt for all fueling and include it with     information can be found on the IRP, Inc. website
your completed IVDR.                                          at www.irponline.org. There is a training video on
                                                              the website home page available in English,
Make sure that any trips that you enter are always            Spanish and French
filled out in descending order and that your trips
include all state/provinces that you traveled through
on your route.

There are different routes that a driver may take,            For additional information on IFTA and the
and most of the miles may be within one state or              requirements related to IFTA, contact the
province. Whether or not the distance you travel is           appropriate agency in your base jurisdiction. You
primarily in one jurisdiction or spread among                 will also find useful information about the
several jurisdictions, all information for the trip           Agreement at the official repository of IFTA at
must be recorded. This includes the dates, the                http://www.iftach.org/index.php.
routes, odometer readings and fuel purchases.

                          Figure 1 ­ Individual Vehicle Mileage & Fuel Record (Example)

Section 1 - Introduction                                                                 Page 1-8
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 2                                          breakdown on the road that will cost time and
      DRIVING SAFELY                                          dollars, or even worse, a crash caused by the
                                                              defect.
This Section Covers
                                                              Federal and state laws require that drivers inspect
 Vehicle Inspection                                           their vehicles. Federal and state inspectors also
 Basic Control of Your Vehicle                                may inspect your vehicles. If they judge the vehicle
 Shifting Gears                                               to be unsafe, they will put it "out of service" until it
 Seeing                                                       is fixed.
 Communicating
 Space Management                                             2.1.2 ­ Types of Vehicle Inspection
 Controlling Your Speed
 Seeing Hazards                                               Vehicle Inspection. A Vehicle inspection will help
 Distracted Driving                                           you find problems that could cause a crash or
 Aggressive Drivers/Road Rage                                 breakdown.
 Night Driving & Driver Fatigue
 Driving in Fog                                               During a Trip. For safety you should:
 Winter Driving
 Hot Weather Driving                                          Watch gauges for signs of trouble.
 Railroad-highway Crossings
 Mountain Driving                                             Use your senses to check for problems (look,
 Driving Emergencies                                          listen, smell, feel).
 Antilock Braking Systems
 Skid Control and Recovery                                    Check critical items when you stop:
 Accident Procedures                                          Tires, wheels and rims.
 Fires                                                        Brakes.
 Alcohol, Other Drugs, and Driving                            Lights and reflectors.
 Hazardous Materials Rules                                    Brake and electrical connections to trailer.
                                                              Trailer coupling devices.
This section contains knowledge and safe driving              Cargo securement devices.
information that all commercial drivers should
know. You must pass a test on this information to             After-trip Inspection and Report. You should do
get a CDL. This section does not have specific                an after-trip inspection at the end of the trip, day, or
information on air brakes, combination vehicles,              tour of duty on each vehicle you operated. It may
doubles, or passenger vehicles. When preparing                include filling out a vehicle condition report listing
for the Vehicle Inspection Test, you must review              any problems you find. The inspection report helps
the material in Section 11 in addition to the                 a motor carrier know when the vehicle needs
information in this section. This section does have           repairs.
basic information on hazardous materials (HazMat)
that all drivers should know. If you need a HazMat            2.1.3 ­ What to Look For
endorsement, you should study Section 9.
                                                              Tire Problems
2.1 ­ Vehicle Inspection
                                                              Too much or too little air pressure.
2.1.1 ­ Why Inspect
                                                              Bad wear. You need at least 4/32-inch tread depth
Safety is the most important reason you inspect               in every major groove on front tires. You need 2/32
your vehicle, safety for yourself and for other road          inch on other tires. No fabric should show through
users.                                                        the tread or sidewall.
A vehicle defect found during an inspection could
save you problems later. You could have a                     Cuts or other damage.

                                                              Tread separation.

                                                              Dual tires that come in contact with each other or
                                                              parts of the vehicle.

                                                              Mismatched sizes.

                                                              Radial and bias-ply tires used together.

                                                              Cut or cracked valve stems.

                                                              Re-grooved, recapped, or retreaded tires on the
                                                              front wheels of a bus are prohibited.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-1
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Wheel and Rim Problems                                        Suspension System Defects. The suspension
                                                              system holds up the vehicle and its load. It keeps
Damaged rims.                                                 the axles in place. Therefore, broken suspension
                                                              parts can be extremely dangerous. Look for:
Rust around wheel nuts may mean the nuts are
loose--check tightness. After a tire has been                 Spring hangers that allow movement of axle from
changed, stop a short while later and re-check                proper position. See Figure 2.2.
tightness of nuts.

Missing clamps, spacers, studs, or lugs means
danger.

Mismatched, bent, or cracked lock rings are
dangerous.

Wheels or rims that have had welding repairs are
not safe.

Bad Brake Drums or Shoes                                      Figure 2.2

Cracked drums.                                                Cracked or broken spring hangers.
                                                              Missing or broken leaves in any leaf spring. If one-
Shoes or pads with oil, grease, or brake fluid on             fourth or more are missing, it will put the vehicle
them.                                                         "out of service", but any defect could be
                                                              dangerous. See Figure 2.3.
Shoes worn dangerously thin, missing, or broken.

Steering System Defects

Missing nuts, bolts, cotter keys, or other parts.

Bent, loose, or broken parts, such as steering
column, steering gear box, or tie rods.

If power steering equipped, check hoses, pumps,
and fluid level; check for leaks.

Steering wheel play of more than 10 degrees
(approximately 2 inches movement at the rim of a
20-inch steering wheel) can make it hard to steer.

                           Figure 2.1                                        Figure 2.3
                                                              Figure 2.3
Section 2 ­ Driving Safely
Version: July 2014                                                                       Page 2-2
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Broken leaves in a multi-leaf spring or leaves that           hazardous materials, you must inspect for proper
have shifted so they might hit a tire or other part.          papers and placarding.
Leaking shock absorbers.
Torque rod or arm, u-bolts, spring hangers, or                2.1.4 ­ CDL Vehicle Inspection Test
other axle positioning parts that are cracked,
damaged, or missing.                                          In order to obtain a CDL you will be required to
Air suspension systems that are damaged and/or                pass a Vehicle inspection test. You will be tested to
leaking. See Figure 2.4.                                      see if you know whether your vehicle is safe to
                                                              drive. You will be asked to do a Vehicle inspection
                           Figure 2.4                         of your vehicle and explain to the examiner what
Any loose, cracked, broken, or missing frame                  you would inspect and why. The following seven-
members.                                                      step inspection method should be useful.
Exhaust System Defects. A broken exhaust
system can let poison fumes into the cab or                   2.1.5 ­ Seven-step Inspection Method
sleeper berth. Look for:
Loose, broken, or missing exhaust pipes, mufflers,            Method of Inspection. You should do a Vehicle
tailpipes, or vertical stacks.                                inspection the same way each time so you will
Loose, broken, or missing mounting brackets,                  learn all the steps and be less likely to forget
clamps, bolts, or nuts.                                       something.
Exhaust system parts rubbing against fuel system
parts, tires, or other moving parts of vehicle.               Approaching the Vehicle. Notice general
Exhaust system parts that are leaking.                        condition. Look for damage or vehicle leaning to
Emergency Equipment. Vehicles must be                         one side. Look under the vehicle for fresh oil,
equipped with emergency equipment. Look for:                  coolant, grease, or fuel leaks. Check the area
Fire extinguisher(s).                                         around the vehicle for hazards to vehicle
Spare electrical fuses (unless equipped with circuit          movement (people, other vehicles, objects, low-
breakers).                                                    hanging wires, limbs, etc.).
Warning devices for parked vehicles (for example,
three reflective warning triangles or 6 fusees or 3           Vehicle Inspection Guide
liquid burning flares).
Cargo (Trucks). You must make sure the truck is               Step 1: Vehicle Overview
not overloaded and the cargo is balanced and
secured before each trip. If the cargo contains               Review Last Vehicle Inspection Report. Drivers
                                                              may have to make a vehicle inspection report in
                                                              writing each day. The motor carrier must repair any
                                                              items in the report that affect safety and certify on
                                                              the report that repairs were made or were
                                                              unnecessary. You must sign the report only if
                                                              defects were noted and certified to be repaired or
                                                              not needed to be repaired.

                                                              Step 2: Check Engine Compartment

                                                              Check That the Parking Brakes Are On and/or
                                                              Wheels Chocked.

                                                              You may have to raise the hood, tilt the cab
                                                              (secure loose things so they don't fall and break
                                                              something), or open the engine compartment door.

                                                              Check the following:

                                                              Engine oil level.

                                                              Coolant level in radiator; condition of hoses.

                                                              Power steering fluid level; hose condition (if so
                                                              equipped).

                                                              Windshield washer fluid level.

                                                              Battery fluid level, connections and tie downs
                                                              (battery may be located elsewhere)

                                                              Automatic transmission fluid level (may require
                                                              engine to be running).

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-3
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Check belts for tightness and excessive wear                  Retarder controls (if vehicle has them).
(alternator, water pump, air compressor)--learn
how much "give" the belts should have when                    Transmission controls.
adjusted right, and check each one.
                                                              Interaxle differential lock (if vehicle has one).
Leaks in the engine compartment (fuel, coolant, oil,
power steering fluid, hydraulic fluid, battery fluid).        Horn(s).

Cracked, worn electrical wiring insulation.                   Windshield wiper/washer.

Lower and secure hood, cab, or engine                         Lights.                   identification,  marker
compartment door.                                             Headlights.
                                                              Dimmer switch.
Step 3: Start Engine and Inspect Inside the Cab               Turn signal.
                                                              Four-way flashers.
Get In and Start Engine                                       Parking, clearance,
                                                              switch(es).
Make sure parking brake is on.
                                                                                         Figure 2.5
Put gearshift in neutral (or "park" if automatic).
                                                              Check Mirrors and Windshield. Inspect mirrors
Start engine; listen for unusual noises.                      and windshield for cracks, dirt, illegal stickers, or
                                                              other obstructions to seeing clearly. Clean and
If equipped, check the Anti-lock Braking System               adjust as necessary.
(ABS) indicator lights. Light on dash should come
on and then turn off. If it stays on the ABS is not           Check Emergency Equipment
working properly. For trailers only, if the yellow
light on the left rear of the trailer stays on, the ABS       Check for safety equipment:
is not working properly.                                      Spare electrical fuses (unless vehicle has circuit
                                                              breakers).
Look at the Gauges                                            Three red reflective triangles, 6 fusees or 3 liquid
                                                              burning flares.
Oil pressure. Should come up to normal within                 Properly charged and rated fire extinguisher.
seconds after engine is started. See Figure 2.5
                                                              Check for optional items such as:
Air pressure. Pressure should build from 50 to 90             Chains (where winter conditions require).
psi within 3 minutes. Build air pressure to governor          Tire changing equipment.
cut-out (usually around 120 ­ 140 psi. Know your              List of emergency phone numbers
vehicle's requirements.

Ammeter and/or voltmeter. Should be in normal
range(s).

Coolant temperature. Should begin gradual rise to
normal operating range.

Engine oil temperature. Should begin gradual rise
to normal operating range.

Warning lights and buzzers. Oil, coolant, charging
circuit warning, and antilock brake system lights
should go out right away.

Check Condition of Controls. Check all of the
following for looseness, sticking, damage, or
improper setting:

Steering wheel.

Clutch.

Accelerator ("gas pedal").

Brake controls.
Foot brake.
Trailer brake (if vehicle has one).
Parking brake.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                                                               Page 2-4
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Accident reporting kit (packet).                              Front

Check Safety Belt. Check that the safety belt is              Condition of front axle.
securely mounted, adjusts; latches properly and is            Condition of steering system.
not ripped or frayed.                                         No loose, worn, bent, damaged or missing parts.
                                                              Must grab steering mechanism to test for
Step 4: Turn Off Engine and Check Lights                      looseness.

Make sure the parking brake is set, turn off the              Condition of windshield.
engine, and take the key with you. Turn on                    Check for damage and clean if dirty.
headlights (low beams) and four-way emergency                 Check windshield wiper arms for proper spring
flashers, and get out of the vehicle.                         tension.
                                                              Check wiper blades for damage, "stiff" rubber, and
Step 5: Do Walk-around Inspection                             securement.

Go to front of vehicle and check that low beams               Lights and reflectors.
are on and both of the four-way flashers are                  Parking, clearance, and identification lights clean,
working.                                                      operating, and proper color (amber at front).
                                                              Reflectors clean and proper color (amber at front).
Push dimmer switch and check that high beams                  Right front turn signal light clean, operating, and
work.                                                         proper color (amber or white on signals facing
                                                              forward).
Turn off headlights and four-way emergency
flashers.                                                     Right Side

Turn on parking, clearance, side-marker, and                  Right front: check all items as done on left front.
identification lights.
                                                              Primary and secondary safety cab locks engaged
Turn on right turn signal, and start walk-around              (if cab-over-engine design).
inspection.
                                                              Right fuel tank(s).
General                                                       Securely mounted, not damaged, or leaking.
                                                              Fuel crossover line secure.
Walk around and inspect.                                      Tank(s) contain enough fuel.
                                                              Cap(s) on and secure.
Clean all lights, reflectors, and glass as you go
along.                                                        Condition of visible parts.

Left Front Side                                               Rear of engine--not leaking.

Driver's door glass should be clean.                          Transmission--not leaking.

Door latches or locks should work properly.                   Exhaust system--secure, not leaking, not touching
                                                              wires, fuel, or air-lines.
Left front wheel.
Condition of wheel and rim--missing, bent, broken             Frame and cross members--no bends or cracks.
studs, clamps, lugs, or any signs of misalignment.
Condition of tires--properly inflated, valve stem and         Air-lines and electrical wiring--secured against
cap OK, no serious cuts, bulges, or tread wear.               snagging, rubbing, wearing.
Use wrench to test rust-streaked lug nuts,
indicating looseness.                                         Spare tire carrier or rack not damaged (if so
Hub oil level OK, no leaks.                                   equipped).

Left front suspension.                                        Spare tire and/or wheel securely mounted in rack.
Condition of spring, spring hangers, shackles,
u-bolts.                                                      Spare tire and wheel adequate (proper size,
Shock absorber condition.                                     properly inflated).

Left front brake.                                             Cargo securement (trucks).
Condition of brake drum or disc.
Condition of hoses.                                           Cargo properly blocked, braced, tied, chained, etc.

                                                              Header board adequate, secure (if required).

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-5
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Side boards, stakes strong enough, free of                    Taillights clean, operating, and proper color (red at
damage, properly set in place (if so equipped).               rear).
                                                              Right rear turn signal operating, and proper color
Canvas or tarp (if required) properly secured to              (red, yellow, or amber at rear).
prevent tearing, billowing, or blocking of mirrors.
                                                              License plate(s) present, clean, and secured.
If oversize, all required signs (flags, lamps, and
reflectors) safely and properly mounted and all               Splash guards present, not damaged, properly
required permits in driver's possession.                      fastened, not dragging on ground, or rubbing tires.

Curbside cargo compartment doors in good                      Cargo secure (trucks).
condition, securely closed, latched/locked and
required security seals in place.                             Cargo properly blocked, braced, tied, chained, etc.

Right Rear                                                    Tailboards up and properly secured.

Condition of wheels and rims--no missing, bent, or            End gates free of damage, properly secured in
broken spacers, studs, clamps, or lugs.                       stake sockets.

Condition of tires--properly inflated, valve stems            Canvas or tarp (if required) properly secured to
and caps OK, no serious cuts, bulges, tread wear,             prevent tearing, billowing, or blocking of either the
tires not rubbing each other, and nothing stuck               rearview mirrors or rear lights.
between them.
                                                              If over-length, or over-width, make sure all signs
Tires same type, e.g., not mixed radial and bias              and/or additional lights/flags are safely and
types.                                                        properly mounted and all required permits are in
                                                              driver's possession.
Tires evenly matched (same sizes).
                                                              Rear doors securely closed, latched/locked.
Wheel bearing/seals not leaking.
                                                              Left Side
Suspension.
                                                              Check all items as done on right side, plus:
Condition of spring(s), spring hangers, shackles,
and u-bolts.                                                  Battery(ies) (if not mounted in engine
                                                              compartment).
Axle secure.
                                                              Battery box(es) securely mounted to vehicle.
Powered axle(s) not leaking lube (gear oil).
                                                              Box has secure cover.
Condition of torque rod arms, bushings.
                                                              Battery(ies) secured against movement.
Condition of shock absorber(s).
                                                              Battery(ies) not broken or leaking.
If retractable axle equipped, check condition of lift
mechanism. If air powered, check for leaks.                   Fluid in battery(ies) at proper level (except
                                                              maintenance-free type).
Condition of air ride components.
                                                              Cell caps present and securely tightened (except
Brakes.                                                       maintenance-free type).

Brake adjustment.                                             Vents in cell caps free of foreign material (except
Condition of brake drum(s) or discs.                          maintenance-free type).
Condition of hoses--look for any wear due to
rubbing.                                                      Step 6: Check Signal Lights

Lights and reflectors.                                        Get In and Turn Off Lights
Side-marker lights clean, operating, and proper
color (red at rear, others amber).                            Turn off all lights.
Side-marker reflectors clean and proper color (red
at rear, others amber).                                       Turn on stop lights (apply trailer hand brake or
                                                              have a helper put on the brake pedal).
Rear
                                                              Turn on left turn signal lights.
Lights and reflectors.
Rear clearance and identification lights clean,               Get Out and Check Lights
operating, and proper color (red at rear).
Reflectors clean and proper color (red at rear).              Left front turn signal light clean, operating and
                                                              proper color (amber or white on signals facing the
                                                              front).

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-6
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Left rear turn signal light and both stop lights clean,       Instruments.
operating, and proper color (red, yellow, or amber).
                                                              Air pressure gauge (if you have air brakes).
Get In Vehicle
Turn off lights not needed for driving.                       Temperature gauges.
Check for all required papers, trip manifests,
permits, etc.                                                 Pressure gauges.
Secure all loose articles in cab (they might interfere
with operation of the controls or hit you in a crash).        Ammeter/voltmeter.
Start the engine.
                                                              Mirrors.
Step 7: Start the Engine and Check
Test for Hydraulic Leaks. If the vehicle has                  Tires.
hydraulic brakes, pump the brake pedal three
times. Then apply firm pressure to the pedal and              Cargo, cargo covers.
hold for five seconds. The pedal should not move.
If it does, there may be a leak or other problem.             Lights, etc
Get it fixed before driving. If the vehicle has air
brakes, do the checks described in Sections 5 and             If you see, hear, smell, or feel anything that might
6 of this manual.                                             mean trouble, check it out.

Brake System                                                  Safety Inspection. Drivers of trucks and truck
                                                              tractors when transporting cargo must inspect the
Test Parking Brake(s)                                         securement of the cargo within the first 50 miles of
                                                              a trip and every 150 miles or every three hours
Fasten safety belt                                            (whichever comes first) after.
Set parking brake (power unit only).
Release trailer parking brake (if applicable).                2.1.7 ­ After-trip Inspection and Report
Place vehicle into a low gear.
                                                              You may have to make a written report each day
Gently pull forward against parking brake to make             on the condition of the vehicle(s) you drove. Report
sure the parking brake holds.                                 anything affecting safety or possibly leading to
Repeat the same steps for the trailer with trailer            mechanical breakdown.
parking brake set and power unit parking brakes
released (if applicable).                                                            Subsection 2.1
If it doesn't hold vehicle, it is faulty; get it fixed.                         Test Your Knowledge

Test Service Brake Stopping Action                            The vehicle inspection report tells the motor carrier
                                                              about problems that may need fixing. Keep a copy
Go about five miles per hour.                                 of your report in the vehicle for one day. That way,
Push brake pedal firmly                                       the next driver can learn about any problems you
"Pulling" to one side or the other can mean brake             have found.
trouble.                                                      1. What is the most important reason for doing a

Any unusual brake pedal "feel" or delayed stopping                 vehicle inspection?
action can mean trouble.                                      2. What things should you check during a trip?
If you find anything unsafe during the Vehicle                3. Name some key steering system parts.
inspection, get it fixed. Federal and state laws              4. Name some suspension system defects.
forbid operating an unsafe vehicle.                           5. What three kinds of emergency equipment

2.1.6 ­ Inspection during a Trip                                   must you have?
Check Vehicle Operation Regularly                             6. What is the minimum tread depth for front

You should check:                                                  tires? For other tires?
                                                              7. Name some things you should check on the

                                                                   front of your vehicle during the walk around
                                                                   inspection.
                                                              8. What should wheel bearing seals be checked
                                                                   for?
                                                              9. How many red reflective triangles should you
                                                                   carry?
                                                              10. How do you test hydraulic brakes for leaks?

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-7
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

11. Why put the starter switch key in your pocket             the vehicle comes to a smooth, safe stop. If you
     during the Vehicle inspection?                           have a manual transmission, push the clutch in
                                                              when the engine is close to idle.
These questions may be on your test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsection 2.1.                      2.2.4 ­ Backing Safely

2.2 ­ Basic Control of Your Vehicle                           Because you cannot see everything behind your
                                                              vehicle, backing is always dangerous. Avoid
To drive a vehicle safely, you must be able to                backing whenever you can. When you park, try to
control its speed and direction. Safe operation of a          park so you will be able to pull forward when you
commercial vehicle requires skill in:                         leave. When you have to back, here are a few
                                                              simple safety rules:
Accelerating.
                                                              Start in the proper position.
Steering.
                                                              Look at your path.
Stopping.
                                                              Use mirrors on both sides.
Backing safely.
                                                              Back slowly.
Fasten your seatbelt when on the road. Apply the
parking brake when you leave your vehicle.                    Back and turn toward the driver's side whenever
                                                              possible.
2.2.1 ­ Accelerating
                                                              Use a helper whenever possible.
Don't roll back when you start. You may hit
someone behind you. If you have a manual                      These rules are discussed in turn below.
transmission vehicle, partly engage the clutch
before you take your right foot off the brake. Put on         Start in the Proper Position. Put the vehicle in
the parking brake whenever necessary to keep                  the best position to allow you to back safely. This
from rolling back. Release the parking brake only             position will depend on the type of backing to be
when you have applied enough engine power to                  done.
keep from rolling back. On a tractor-trailer
equipped with a trailer brake hand valve, the hand            Look at Your Path. Look at your line of travel
valve can be applied to keep from rolling back.               before you begin. Get out and walk around the
                                                              vehicle. Check your clearance to the sides and
Speed up smoothly and gradually so the vehicle                overhead, in and near the path your vehicle will
does not jerk. Rough acceleration can cause                   take.
mechanical damage. When pulling a trailer, rough
acceleration can damage the coupling.                         Use Mirrors on Both Sides. Check the outside
                                                              mirrors on both sides frequently. Get out of the
Speed up very gradually when traction is poor, as             vehicle and check your path if you are unsure.
in rain or snow. If you use too much power, the
drive wheels may spin. You could lose control. If             Back Slowly. Always back as slowly as possible.
the drive wheels begin to spin, take your foot off            Use the lowest reverse gear. That way you can
the accelerator.                                              more easily correct any steering errors. You also
                                                              can stop quickly if necessary.
2.2.2 ­ Steering
                                                              Back and Turn Toward the Driver's Side. Back
Hold the steering wheel firmly with both hands.               to the driver's side so that you can see better.
Your hands should be on opposite sides of the                 Backing toward the right side is very dangerous
wheel. If you hit a curb or a pothole (chuckhole),            because you can't see as well. If you back and turn
the wheel could pull away from your hands unless              toward the driver's side, you can watch the rear of
you have a firm hold.                                         your vehicle by looking out the side window. Use
                                                              driver-side backing--even if it means going around
2.2.3 ­ Stopping                                              the block to put your vehicle in this position. The
                                                              added safety is worth it.
Push the brake pedal down gradually. The amount
of brake pressure you need to stop the vehicle will           Use a Helper. Use a helper when you can. There
depend on the speed of the vehicle and how                    are blind spots you can't see. That's why a helper
quickly you need to stop. Control the pressure so             is important. The helper should stand near the
                                                              back of your vehicle where you can see the helper.
                                                              Before you begin backing, work out a set of hand

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-8
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

signals that you both understand. Agree on a                  Press accelerator, increase engine and gear speed
signal for "stop."                                            to the rpm required in the lower gear.

2.3 ­ Shifting Gears                                          Push in clutch and shift to lower gear at the same
                                                              time.
Correct shifting of gears is important. If you can't
get your vehicle into the right gear while driving,           Release clutch and press accelerator at the same
you will have less control.                                   time.

2.3.1 ­ Manual Transmissions                                  Downshifting, like upshifting, requires knowing
                                                              when to shift. Use either the tachometer or the
Basic Method for Shifting Up. Most heavy                      speedometer and downshift at the right rpm or
vehicles with manual transmissions require double             road speed.
clutching to change gears. This is the basic
method:                                                       Special conditions where you should downshift
                                                              are:
Release accelerator, push in clutch and shift to
neutral at the same time.                                     Before Starting Down a Hill. Slow down and shift
                                                              down to a speed that you can control without using
Release clutch.                                               the brakes hard. Otherwise the brakes can
                                                              overheat and lose their braking power.
Let engine and gears slow down to the rpm
required for the next gear (this takes practice).             Downshift before starting down the hill. Make sure
                                                              you are in a low enough gear, usually lower than
Push in clutch and shift to the higher gear at the            the gear required to climb the same hill.
same time.
                                                              Before Entering a Curve. Slow down to a safe
Release clutch and press accelerator at the same              speed, and downshift to the right gear before
time.                                                         entering the curve. This lets you use some power
                                                              through the curve to help the vehicle be more
Shifting gears using double clutching requires                stable while turning. It also allows you to speed up
practice. If you remain too long in neutral, you may          as soon as you are out of the curve.
have difficulty putting the vehicle into the next
gear. If so, don't try to force it. Return to neutral,        2.3.2 ­ Multi-speed Rear Axles and Auxiliary
release clutch, increase engine speed to match                Transmissions
road speed, and try again.
                                                              Multi-speed rear axles and auxiliary transmissions
Knowing When to Shift Up. There are two ways                  are used on many vehicles to provide extra gears.
of knowing when to shift:                                     You usually control them by a selector knob or
                                                              switch on the gearshift lever of the main
Use Engine Speed (rpm). Study the driver's                    transmission. There are many different shift
manual for your vehicle and learn the operating               patterns. Learn the right way to shift gears in the
rpm range. Watch your tachometer, and shift up                vehicle you will drive.
when your engine reaches the top of the range.
(Some newer vehicles use "progressive" shifting:              2.3.3 ­ Automatic Transmissions
the rpm at which you shift becomes higher as you
move up in the gears. Find out what's right for the           Some vehicles have automatic transmissions. You
vehicle you will operate.)                                    can select a low range to get greater engine
                                                              braking when going down grades. The lower
Use Road Speed (mph). Learn what speeds each                  ranges prevent the transmission from shifting up
gear is good for. Then, by using the speedometer,             beyond the selected gear (unless the governor rpm
you'll know when to shift up.                                 is exceeded). It is very important to use this
                                                              braking effect when going down grades.
With either method, you may learn to use engine
sounds to know when to shift.                                 2.3.4 ­ Retarders

Basic Procedures for Shifting Down                            Some vehicles have "retarders." Retarders help
                                                              slow a vehicle, reducing the need for using your
Release accelerator, push in clutch, and shift to             brakes. They reduce brake wear and give you
neutral at the same time.                                     another way to slow down. There are four basic
                                                              types of retarders (exhaust, engine, hydraulic, and
Release clutch.                                               electric). All retarders can be turned on or off by
                                                              the driver. On some vehicles the retarding power

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-9
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

can be adjusted. When turned "on," retarders apply            mile. If you're not looking that far ahead, you may
their braking power (to the drive wheels only)                have to stop too quickly or make quick lane
whenever you let up on the accelerator pedal all              changes. Looking 12 to 15 seconds ahead doesn't
the way.                                                      mean not paying attention to things that are closer.
                                                              Good drivers shift their attention back and forth,
Because these devices can be noisy, be sure you               near and far. Figure 2.6 illustrates how far to look
know where their use is permitted.                            ahead.

Caution. When your drive wheels have poor
traction, the retarder may cause them to skid.
Therefore, you should turn the retarder off
whenever the road is wet, icy, or snow covered.

Subsections 2.2 and 2.3
Test Your Knowledge

1.  Why should you back toward the driver's

    side?

2.  If stopped on a hill, how can you start

    moving without rolling back?

3.  When backing, why is it important to use a

    helper?                                                                               Figure 2.6

4.  What's the most important hand signal that                Look for Traffic. Look for vehicles coming onto
                                                              the highway, into your lane, or turning. Watch for
    you and the helper should agree on?                       brake lights from slowing vehicles. By seeing these
                                                              things far enough ahead, you can change your
5.  What are the two special conditions where                 speed, or change lanes if necessary to avoid a
                                                              problem. If a traffic light has been green for a long
    you should downshift?                                     time it will probably change before you get there.
                                                              Start slowing down and be ready to stop.
6.  When should you downshift automatic
                                                              2.4.2 ­ Seeing to the Sides and Rear
    transmissions?
                                                              It's important to know what's going on behind and
7.  Retarders keep you from skidding when                     to the sides. Check your mirrors regularly. Check
                                                              more often in special situations.
    the road is slippery. True or False?
                                                              Mirror Adjustment. Mirror adjustment should be
8.  What are the two ways to know when to                     checked prior to the start of any trip and can only
                                                              be checked accurately when the trailer(s) are
    shift?                                                    straight. You should check and adjust each mirror
                                                              to show some part of the vehicle. This will give you
These questions may be on the test. If you can't              a reference point for judging the position of the
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.2 and 2.3.             other images.

2.4 ­ Seeing                                                  Regular Checks. You need to make regular
                                                              checks of your mirrors to be aware of traffic and to
To be a safe driver you need to know what's going             check your vehicle.
on all around your vehicle. Not looking properly is a
major cause of accidents.                                     Traffic. Check your mirrors for vehicles on either
                                                              side and in back of you. In an emergency, you may
2.4.1 ­ Seeing Ahead                                          need to know whether you can make a quick lane
                                                              change. Use your mirrors to spot overtaking
All drivers look ahead; but many don't look far               vehicles. There are "blind spots" that your mirrors
enough ahead.                                                 cannot show you. Check your mirrors regularly to
                                                              know where other vehicles are around you, and to
Importance of Looking Far Enough Ahead.                       see if they move into your blind spots.
Because stopping or changing lanes can take a lot
of distance, knowing what the traffic is doing on all                                                                               Page 2-10
sides of you is very important. You need to look
well ahead to make sure you have room to make
these moves safely.

How Far Ahead to Look. Most good drivers look
at least 12 to 15 seconds ahead. That means
looking ahead the distance you will travel in 12 to
15 seconds. At lower speeds, that's about one
block. At highway speeds it's about a quarter of a

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Check Your Vehicle. Use the mirrors to keep an                Other drivers can't know what you are going to do
eye on your tires. It's one way to spot a tire fire. If       until you tell them.
you're carrying open cargo, you can use the                   Signaling what you intend to do is important for
mirrors to check it. Look for loose straps, ropes, or         safety. Here are some general rules for signaling.
chains. Watch for a flapping or ballooning tarp.
                                                                                         Figure 2.7
Special Situations. Special situations require
more than regular mirror checks. These are lane               Turns. There are three good rules for using turn
changes, turns, merges, and tight maneuvers.                  signals:
                                                              Signal early. Signal well before you turn. It is the
Lane Changes. You need to check your mirrors to               best way to keep others from trying to pass you.
make sure no one is alongside you or about to                 Signal continuously. You need both hands on the
pass you. Check your mirrors:                                 wheel to turn safely. Don't cancel the signal until
                                                              you have completed the turn.
Before you change lanes to make sure there is                 Cancel your signal. Don't forget to turn off your turn
enough room.                                                  signal after you've turned (if you don't have self-
                                                              canceling signals).
After you have signaled, to check that no one has             Lane Changes. Put your turn signal on before
moved into your blind spot.                                   changing lanes. Change lanes slowly and
                                                              smoothly. That way a driver you didn't see may
Right after you start the lane change, to double-             have a chance to honk his/her horn, or avoid your
check that your path is clear.                                vehicle.
                                                              Slowing Down. Warn drivers behind you when
After you complete the lane change.                           you see you'll need to slow down. A few light taps
                                                              on the brake pedal -- enough to flash the brake
Turns. In turns, check your mirrors to make sure              lights -- should warn following drivers. Use the
the rear of your vehicle will not hit anything.               four-way emergency flashers for times when you

Merges. When merging, use your mirrors to make
sure the gap in traffic is large enough for you to
enter safely.

Tight Maneuvers. Any time you are driving in
close quarters, check your mirrors often. Make
sure you have enough clearance.

How to Use Mirrors. Use mirrors correctly by
checking them quickly and understanding what you
see.

When you use your mirrors while driving on the
road, check quickly. Look back and forth between
the mirrors and the road ahead. Don't focus on the
mirrors for too long. Otherwise, you will travel quite
a distance without knowing what's happening
ahead.

Many large vehicles have curved (convex,
"fisheye," "spot," "bug-eye") mirrors that show a
wider area than flat mirrors. This is often helpful.
But everything appears smaller in a convex mirror
than it would if you were looking at it directly.
Things also seem farther away than they really are.
It's important to realize this and to allow for it.
Figure 2.7 shows the field of vision using a convex
mirror.

2.5 ­ Communicating

2.5.1 ­ Signal Your Intentions

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-11
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

are driving very slowly or are stopped. Warn other            Don't trust the taillights to give warning. Drivers
drivers in any of the following situations:                   have crashed into the rear of a parked vehicle
                                                              because they thought it was moving normally.
Trouble Ahead. The size of your vehicle may                   If you must stop on a road or the shoulder of any
make it hard for drivers behind you to see hazards            road, you must put out your emergency warning
ahead. If you see a hazard that will require slowing          devices within ten minutes. Place your warning
down, warn the drivers behind by flashing your                devices at the following locations:
brake lights.
                                                                 If you must stop on or by a one-way or divided
Tight Turns. Most car drivers don't know how                     highway, place warning devices 10 feet, 100
slowly you have to go to make a tight turn in a                  feet, and 200 feet toward the approaching traffic.
large vehicle. Give drivers behind you warning by                See Figure 2.8.
braking early and slowing gradually.
                                                                                          Figure 2.8
Stopping on the Road. Truck and bus drivers
sometimes stop in the roadway to unload cargo or
passengers, or to stop at a railroad crossing. Warn
following drivers by flashing your brake lights.
Don't stop suddenly.

Driving Slowly. Drivers often do not realize how
fast they are catching up to a slow vehicle until
they are very close. If you must drive slowly, alert
following drivers by turning on your emergency
flashers if it is legal. (Laws regarding the use of
flashers differ from one state to another. Check the
laws of the states where you will drive.)

Don't Direct Traffic. Some drivers try to help out
others by signaling when it is safe to pass. You
should not do this. You could cause an accident.
You could be blamed and it could cost you many
thousands of dollars.

2.5.2 ­ Communicating Your Presence

Other drivers may not notice your vehicle even
when it's in plain sight. To help prevent accidents,
let them know you're there.

When Passing. Whenever you are about to pass a
vehicle, pedestrian, or bicyclist, assume they don't
see you. They could suddenly move in front of you.
When it is legal, tap the horn lightly or, at night,
flash your lights from low to high beam and back.
And, drive carefully enough to avoid a crash even
if they don't see or hear you.

When It's Hard to See. At dawn, dusk, in rain, or
snow, you need to make yourself easier to see. If
you are having trouble seeing other vehicles, other
drivers will have trouble seeing you. Turn on your
lights. Use the headlights, not just the identification
or clearance lights. Use the low beams; high
beams can bother people in the daytime as well as
at night.

When Parked at the Side of the Road. When you
pull off the road and stop, be sure to turn on the
four-way emergency flashers. This is important at
night.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-12
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

If you stop on a two-lane road carrying traffic in
both directions or on an undivided highway, place
warning devices within 10 feet of the front or rear
corners to mark the location of the vehicle and 100
feet behind and ahead of the vehicle, on the
shoulder or in the lane you stopped in. See Figure
2.9.

                           Figure 2.9                                                   Figure 2.10

Back beyond any hill, curve, or other obstruction             When putting out the triangles, hold them between
that prevents other drivers from seeing the vehicle           yourself and the oncoming traffic for your own
within 500 feet. If line of sight view is obstructed          safety. (So other drivers can see you.)
due to hill or curve, move the rear-most triangle to
a point back down the road so warning is provided.            Use Your Horn When Needed. Your horn can let
See Figure 2.10.                                              others know you're there. It can help to avoid a
                                                              crash. Use your horn when needed. However, it
Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    can startle others and could be dangerous when
Version: July 2014                                            used unnecessarily.

                                                              2.6 ­ Controlling Speed

                                                              Driving too fast is a major cause of fatal crashes.
                                                              You must adjust your speed depending on driving
                                                              conditions. These include traction, curves, visibility,
                                                              traffic and hills.

                                                              2.6.1 ­ Stopping Distance

                                                              Perception Distance + Reaction Distance +
                                                              Braking Distance = Total Stopping Distance

                                                              Perception distance. The distance your vehicle
                                                              travels, in ideal conditions; from the time your eyes
                                                              see a hazard until your brain recognizes it. Keep
                                                              in mind certain mental and physical conditions can
                                                              affect your perception distance. It can be affected
                                                              greatly depending on visibility and the hazard itself.
                                                              The average perception time for an alert driver is
                                                              1¾ seconds. At 55 mph this accounts for 142 feet
                                                              traveled.

                                                                                                                                    Page 2-13
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Reaction distance. The distance you will                      they absorb. But the brakes, tires, springs, and
continue to travel, in ideal conditions; before you           shock absorbers on heavy vehicles are designed
physically hit the brakes, in response to a hazard            to work best when the vehicle is fully loaded.
seen ahead. The average driver has a reaction                 Empty trucks require greater stopping distances
time of ¾ second to 1 second. At 55 mph this                  because an empty vehicle has less traction.
accounts for 61 feet traveled.
                                                              2.6.2 ­ Matching Speed to the Road Surface
Braking distance. The distance your vehicle will
travel, in ideal conditions; while you are braking.           You can't steer or brake a vehicle unless you have
At 55 mph on dry pavement with good brakes, it                traction. Traction is friction between the tires and
can take about 216 feet.                                      the road. There are some road conditions that
                                                              reduce traction and call for lower speeds.
Total stopping distance. The total minimum
distance your vehicle has traveled, in ideal                  Slippery Surfaces. It will take longer to stop, and
conditions; with everything considered, including             it will be harder to turn without skidding, when the
perception distance, reaction distance and braking            road is slippery. Wet roads can double stopping
distance, until you can bring your vehicle to a               distance. You must drive slower to be able to stop
complete stop. At 55 mph, your vehicle will travel            in the same distance as on a dry road. Reduce
a minimum of 419 feet. See Figure 2.11.                       speed by about one-third (e.g., slow from 55 to
                                                              about 35 mph) on a wet road. On packed snow,
                          Figure 2.11                         reduce speed by a half, or more. If the surface is
                                                              icy, reduce speed to a crawl and stop driving as
The Effect of Speed on Stopping Distance.                     soon as you can safely do so.
The faster you drive, the greater the impact or
striking power of your vehicle. When you double               Identifying Slippery Surfaces. Sometimes it's
your speed from 20 to 40 mph the impact is 4                  hard to know if the road is slippery. Here are some
times greater. The braking distance is also 4 times           signs of slippery roads:
longer. Triple the speed from 20 to 60 mph and
the impact and braking distance is 9 times greater.           Shaded Areas. Shady parts of the road will remain
At 60 mph, your stopping distance is greater than             icy and slippery long after open areas have melted.
the length of a football field. Increase the speed to
80 mph and the impact and braking distance are                Bridges. When the temperature drops, bridges will
16 times greater than at 20 mph. High speeds                  freeze before the road will. Be especially careful
greatly increase the severity of crashes and                  when the temperature is close to 32 degrees
stopping distances. By slowing down, you can                  Fahrenheit.
reduce braking distance.
                                                              Melting Ice. Slight melting will make ice wet. Wet
The Effect of Vehicle Weight on Stopping                      ice is much more slippery than ice that is not wet.
Distance. The heavier the vehicle, the more work
the brakes must do to stop it, and the more heat              Black Ice. Black ice is a thin layer that is clear
                                                              enough that you can see the road underneath it. It
                                                              makes the road look wet. Any time the temperature
                                                              is below freezing and the road looks wet, watch out
                                                              for black ice.

                                                              Vehicle Icing. An easy way to check for ice is to
                                                              open the window and feel the front of the mirror,
                                                              mirror support, or antenna. If there's ice on these,
                                                              the road surface is probably starting to ice up.

                                                              Just After Rain Begins. Right after it starts to
                                                              rain, the water mixes with oil left on the road by
                                                              vehicles. This makes the road very slippery. If the
                                                              rain continues, it will wash the oil away.

                                                              Hydroplaning. In some weather, water or slush
                                                              collects on the road. When this happens, your
                                                              vehicle can hydroplane. It's like water skiing--the
                                                              tires lose their contact with the road and have little
                                                              or no traction. You may not be able to steer or
                                                              brake. You can regain control by releasing the
                                                              accelerator and pushing in the clutch. This will slow
                                                              your vehicle and let the wheels turn freely. If the
                                                              vehicle is hydroplaning, do not use the brakes to

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-14
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

slow down. If the drive wheels start to skid, push in         the speed of traffic will not be able to save much
the clutch to let them turn freely.                           time. The risks involved are not worth it. If you go
                                                              faster than the speed of other traffic, you'll have to
It does not take a lot of water to cause                      keep passing other vehicles. This increases the
hydroplaning. Hydroplaning can occur at speeds                chance of a crash, and it is more tiring. Fatigue
as low as 30 mph if there is a lot of water.                  increases the chance of a crash. Going with the
Hydroplaning is more likely if tire pressure is low,          flow of traffic is safer and easier.
or the tread is worn. (The grooves in a tire carry
away the water; if they aren't deep, they don't work          2.6.6 ­ Speed on Downgrades
well.)
                                                              Your vehicle's speed will increase on downgrades
Road surfaces where water can collect can create              because of gravity. Your most important objective
conditions that cause a vehicle to hydroplane.                is to select and maintain a speed that is not too
Watch for clear reflections, tire splashes, and               fast for the:
raindrops on the road. These are indications of
standing water.                                               Total weight of the vehicle and cargo.

2.6.3 ­ Speed and Curves                                      Length of the grade.

Drivers must adjust their speed for curves in the             Steepness of the grade.
road. If you take a curve too fast, two things can
happen. The tires can lose their traction and                 Road conditions.
continue straight ahead, so you skid off the road.
Or, the tires may keep their traction and the vehicle         Weather.
rolls over. Tests have shown that trucks with a high
center of gravity can roll over at the posted speed           If a speed limit is posted, or there is a sign
limit for a curve.                                            indicating "Maximum Safe Speed," never exceed
                                                              the speed shown. Also, look for and heed warning
Slow to a safe speed before you enter a curve.                signs indicating the length and steepness of the
Braking in a curve is dangerous because it is                 grade. You must use the braking effect of the
easier to lock the wheels and cause a skid. Slow              engine as the principal way of controlling your
down as needed. Don't ever exceed the posted                  speed on downgrades. The braking effect of the
speed limit for the curve. Be in a gear that will let         engine is greatest when it is near the governed
you accelerate slightly in the curve. This will help          rpms and the transmission is in the lower gears.
you keep control.                                             Save your brakes so you will be able to slow or
                                                              stop as required by road and traffic conditions.
2.6.4 ­ Speed and Distance Ahead                              Shift your transmission to a low gear before
                                                              starting down the grade and use the proper
You should always be able to stop within the                  braking techniques. Please read carefully the
distance you can see ahead. Fog, rain, or other               section on going down long, steep downgrades
conditions may require that you slowdown to be                safely in "Mountain Driving."
able to stop in the distance you can see. At night,
you can't see as far with low beams as you can                2.6.7 ­ Roadway Work Zones
with high beams. When you must use low beams,
slow down.                                                    Speeding traffic is the number one cause of injury
                                                              and death in roadway work zones. Observe the
2.6.5 ­ Speed and Traffic Flow                                posted speed limits at all times when approaching
                                                              and driving through a work zone. Watch your
When you're driving in heavy traffic, the safest              speedometer, and don't allow your speed to creep
speed is the speed of other vehicles. Vehicles                up as you drive through long sections of road
going the same direction at the same speed are                construction. Decrease your speed for adverse
not likely to run into one another. In many states,           weather or road conditions. Decrease your speed
speed limits are lower for trucks and buses than for          even further when a worker is close to the
cars. It can vary as much as 15 mph. Use extra                roadway.
caution when you change lanes or pass on these
roadways. Drive at the speed of the traffic, if you                        Subsections 2.4, 2.5, and 2.6
can without going at an illegal or unsafe speed.                                Test Your Knowledge
Keep a safe following distance.
                                                              1. How far ahead does the manual say you
The main reason drivers exceed speed limits is to                     should look?
save time. But, anyone trying to drive faster than
                                                              2. What are two main things to look for ahead?

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-15
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

3. What's your most important way to see the                  you'd need 5 seconds for a 40-foot vehicle and 7
        sides and rear of your vehicle?                       seconds for a 60-foot vehicle. See Figure 2.12.

4. What does "communicating" mean in safe                     To know how much space you have, wait until the
        driving?                                              vehicle ahead passes a shadow on the road, a
                                                              pavement marking, or some other clear landmark.
5. Where should you place reflectors when                     Then count off the seconds like this: "one
        stopped on a divided highway?                         thousand- and-one, one thousand-and-two" and so
                                                              on, until you reach the same spot. Compare your
6. What three things add up to total stopping                 count with the rule of one second for every ten feet
        distance?                                             of length.

7. If you go twice as fast, will your stopping                If you are driving a 40-foot truck and only counted
        distance increase by two or four times?               up to 2 seconds, you're too close. Drop back a little
                                                              and count again until you have 4 seconds of
8. Empty trucks have the best braking. True or                following distance (or 5 seconds, if you're going
        False?                                                over 40 mph). After a little practice, you will know
                                                              how far back you should be. Remember to add 1
9. What is hydroplaning?                                      second for speeds above 40 mph. Also remember
                                                              that when the road is slippery, you need much
10. What is "black ice"?                                      more space to stop.
These questions may be on the test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.4, 2.5, and
2.6.

2.7 ­ Managing Space                                                                    Figure 2.12
                                                              2.7.2 ­ Space Behind
To be a safe driver, you need space all around                You can't stop others from following you too
your vehicle. When things go wrong, space gives               closely. But there are things you can do to make it
you time to think and to take action.                         safer.

To have space available when something goes                                                                                         Page 2-16
wrong, you need to manage space. While this is
true for all drivers, it is very important for large
vehicles. They take up more space and they
require more space for stopping and turning.

2.7.1 ­ Space Ahead

Of all the space around your vehicle, it is the area
ahead of the vehicle--the space you're driving into -
-that is most important.

The Need for Space Ahead. You need space
ahead in case you must suddenly stop. According
to accident reports, the vehicle that trucks and
buses most often run into is the one in front of
them. The most frequent cause is following too
closely. Remember, if the vehicle ahead of you is
smaller than yours, it can probably stop faster than
you can. You may crash if you are following too
closely.

How Much Space? How much space should you
keep in front of you? One good rule says you need
at least one second for each 10 feet of vehicle
length at speeds below 40 mph. At greater speeds,
you must add 1 second for safety. For example, if
you are driving a 40-foot vehicle, you should leave
4 seconds between you and the vehicle ahead. In
a 60-foot rig, you'll need 6 seconds. Over 40 mph,

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Stay to the Right. Heavy vehicles are often                   forward so that you are sure the other driver can
tailgated when they can't keep up with the speed of           see you.
traffic. This often happens when you're going
uphill. If a heavy load is slowing you down, stay in          Strong Winds. Strong winds make it difficult to
the right lane if you can. Going uphill, you should           stay in your lane. The problem is usually worse for
not pass another slow vehicle unless you can get              lighter vehicles. This problem can be especially
around quickly and safely.                                    bad coming out of tunnels. Don't drive alongside
                                                              others if you can avoid it.
Dealing with Tailgaters Safely. In a large vehicle,
it's often hard to see whether a vehicle is close
behind you. You may be tailgated:

When you are traveling slowly. Drivers trapped
behind slow vehicles often follow closely.

In bad weather. Many car drivers follow large
vehicles closely during bad weather, especially
when it is hard to see the road ahead.

If you find yourself being tailgated, here are some
things you can do to reduce the chances of a
crash:

Avoid quick changes. If you have to slow down or
turn, signal early, and reduce speed very gradually.

Increase your following distance. Opening up
room in front of you will help you to avoid having to
make sudden speed or direction changes. It also
makes it easier for the tailgater to get around you.

Don't speed up. It's safer to be tailgated at a low
speed than a high speed.

Avoid tricks. Don't turn on your taillights or flash
your brake lights. Follow the suggestions above.

2.7.3 ­ Space to the Sides

Commercial vehicles are often wide and take up
most of a lane. Safe drivers will manage what little
space they have. You can do this by keeping your
vehicle centered in your lane, and avoid driving
alongside others.

Staying Centered in a Lane. You need to keep
your vehicle centered in the lane to keep safe
clearance on either side. If your vehicle is wide,
you have little room to spare.

Traveling Next to Others. There are two dangers
in traveling alongside other vehicles:

Another driver may change lanes suddenly and
turn into you.

You may be trapped when you need to change
lanes.

Find an open spot where you aren't near other
traffic. When traffic is heavy, it may be hard to find
an open spot. If you must travel near other
vehicles, try to keep as much space as possible
between you and them. Also, drop back or pull

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-17
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

2.7.4 ­ Space Overhead                                        If you are driving a truck or bus that cannot make
                                                              the right turn without swinging into another lane,
Hitting overhead objects is a danger. Make sure               turn wide as you complete the turn. Keep the rear
you always have overhead clearance.                           of your vehicle close to the curb. This will stop
                                                              other drivers from passing you on the right.
Don't assume that the heights posted at bridges               Don't turn wide to the left as you start the turn. A
and overpasses are correct. Re-paving or packed               following driver may think you are turning left and
snow may have reduced the clearances since the                try to pass you on the right. You may crash into the
heights were posted.                                          other vehicle as you complete your turn.
                                                              If you must cross into the oncoming lane to make a
The weight of a cargo van changes its height. An              turn, watch out for vehicles coming toward you.
empty van is higher than a loaded one. That you               Give them room to go by or to stop. However, don't
got under a bridge when you were loaded does not              back up for them, because you might hit someone
mean that you can do it when you are empty.                   behind you. See Figure 2.13.

If you doubt you have safe space to pass under an                                       Figure 2.13
object, go slowly. If you aren't sure you can make            Left Turns. On a left turn, make sure you have
it, take another route. Warnings are often posted             reached the center of the intersection before you
on low bridges or underpasses, but sometimes                  start the left turn. If you turn too soon, the left side
they are not.                                                 of your vehicle may hit another vehicle because of
                                                              off-tracking.
Some roads can cause a vehicle to tilt. There can             If there are two turning lanes, always take the right
be a problem clearing objects along the edge of               turn lane. Don't start in the inside lane because
the road, such as signs, trees, or bridge supports.           you may have to swing right to make the turn.
Where this is a problem, drive a little closer to the         Drivers on your left can be more readily seen. See
center of the road.

Before you back into an area, get out and check
for overhanging objects such as trees, branches,
or electric wires. It's easy to miss seeing them
while you are backing. (Also check for other
hazards at the same time.)

2.7.5 ­ Space Below

Many drivers forget about the space under their
vehicles. That space can be very small when a
vehicle is heavily loaded. This is often a problem
on dirt roads and in unpaved yards. Don't take a
chance on getting hung up. Drainage channels
across roads can cause the ends of some vehicles
to drag. Cross such depressions carefully.

Railroad tracks can also cause problems,
particularly when pulling trailers with a low
underneath clearance. Don't take a chance on
getting hung up halfway across.

2.7.6 ­ Space for Turns

The space around a truck or bus is important in
turns. Because of wide turning and off-tracking,
large vehicles can hit other vehicles or objects
during turns.

Right Turns. Here are some rules to help prevent
right-turn crashes:

Turn slowly to give yourself and others more time
to avoid problems.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-18
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Figure 2.14.                                                  lessen the problem, move-over laws have been
                          Figure 2.14                         enacted, which require drivers to slow and change
                                                              lanes when approaching a roadside incident or
2.7.7 ­ Space Needed to Cross or Enter Traffic                emergency vehicle. Signs are posted on roadways
                                                              in states that have such laws].
Be aware of the size and weight of your vehicle
when you cross or enter traffic. Here are some                [When approaching an authorized emergency
important things to keep in mind.                             vehicle stopped on the roadside or a work zone,
                                                              you should proceed with caution by slowing and
Because of slow acceleration and the space large              yielding the right-of-way by making a lane change
vehicles require, you may need a much larger gap              into a lane not next to that of the authorized
to enter traffic than you would in a car.                     emergency vehicle or work zone if safety and
                                                              traffic conditions permit. If a lane change is
Acceleration varies with the load. Allow more room            unsafe, slow down and proceed with caution while
if your vehicle is heavily loaded.                            maintaining a safe speed for traffic conditions].

Before you start across a road, make sure you can             Slow down and be very careful if you see any of
get all the way across before traffic reaches you.            the following road hazards.

2.8 ­ Seeing Hazards                                          Work Zones. When people are working on the
                                                              road, it is a hazard. There may be narrower lanes,
2.8.1 ­ Importance of Seeing Hazards                          sharp turns, or uneven surfaces. Other drivers are
                                                              often distracted and drive unsafely. Workers and
What Is a Hazard? A hazard is any road condition              construction vehicles may get in the way. Drive
or other road user (driver, bicyclist, pedestrian) that       slowly and carefully near work zones. Use your
is a possible danger. For example, a car in front of          four-way flashers or brake lights to warn drivers
you is headed toward the freeway exit, but his                behind you.
brake lights come on and he begins braking hard.
This could mean that the driver is uncertain about            Drop Off. Sometimes the pavement drops off
taking the off ramp. He might suddenly return to              sharply near the edge of the road. Driving too near
the highway. This car is a hazard. If the driver of           the edge can tilt your vehicle toward the side of the
the car cuts in front of you, it is no longer just a          road. This can cause the top of your vehicle to hit
hazard; it is an emergency.                                   roadside objects (signs, tree limbs). Also, it can be
                                                              hard to steer as you cross the drop off, going off
Seeing Hazards Lets You Be Prepared. You will                 the road, or coming back on.
have more time to act if you see hazards before
they become emergencies. In the example above,                Foreign Objects. Things that have fallen on the
you might make a lane change or slow down to                  road can be hazards. They can be a danger to
prevent a crash if the car suddenly cuts in front of          your tires and wheel rims. They can damage
you. Seeing this hazard gives you time to check               electrical and brake lines. They can be caught
your mirrors and signal a lane change. Being                  between dual tires and cause severe damage.
prepared reduces the danger. A driver who did not             Some obstacles that appear to be harmless can be
see the hazard until the slow car pulled back on              very dangerous. For example, cardboard boxes
the highway in front of him would have to do                  may be empty, but they may also contain some
something very suddenly. Sudden braking or a                  solid or heavy material capable of causing
quick lane change is much more likely to lead to a            damage. The same is true of paper and cloth
crash.                                                        sacks. It is important to remain alert for objects of
                                                              all sorts, so you can see them early enough to
Learning to See Hazards. There are often clues                avoid them without making sudden, unsafe moves.
that will help you see hazards. The more you drive,
the better you can learn to see hazards. This                 Off Ramps/On Ramps. Freeway and turnpike
section will talk about hazards that you should be            exits can be particularly dangerous for commercial
aware of.                                                     vehicles. Off ramps and on ramps often have
                                                              speed limit signs posted. Remember, these speeds
2.8.2 ­ Hazardous Roads                                       may be safe for automobiles, but may not be safe
                                                              for larger vehicles or heavily loaded vehicles. Exits
[Move-Over Laws]                                              that go downhill and turn at the same time can be
                                                              especially dangerous. The downgrade makes it
[The incidents of law enforcement officers,                   difficult to reduce speed. Braking and turning at the
emergency medical services, fire department                   same time can be a dangerous practice. Make
personnel and people working on the road are
being struck while performing duties at the
roadside are increasing at a frightening pace. To

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-19
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

sure you are going slowly enough before you get               alert even when they are looking at you. They may
on the curved part of an off ramp or on ramp.                 believe that they have the right of way.

2.8.3 ­ Drivers Who Are Hazards                               Children. Children tend to act quickly without
                                                              checking traffic. Children playing with one another
In order to protect yourself and others, you must             may not look for traffic and are a serious hazard.
know when other drivers may do something
hazardous. Some clues to this type of hazard are              Talkers. Drivers or pedestrians talking to one
discussed below.                                              another may not be paying close attention to the
                                                              traffic.
Blocked Vision. People who can't see others are
a very dangerous hazard. Be alert for drivers                 Workers. People working on or near the roadway
whose vision is blocked. Vans, loaded station                 are a hazard clue. The work creates a distraction
wagons, and cars with the rear window blocked are             for other drivers and the workers themselves may
examples. Rental trucks should be watched                     not see you.
carefully. Their drivers are often not used to the
limited vision they have to the sides and rear of the         Ice Cream Trucks. Someone selling ice cream is
truck. In winter, vehicles with frosted, ice-covered,         a hazard clue. Children may be nearby and may
or snow-covered windows are hazards.                          not see you.

Vehicles may be partly hidden by blind                        Disabled Vehicles. Drivers changing a tire or
intersections or alleys. If you only can see the rear         fixing an engine often do not pay attention to the
or front end of a vehicle but not the driver, then he         danger that roadway traffic is to them. They are
or she can't see you. Be alert because he/she may             often careless. Jacked up wheels or raised hoods
back out or enter into your lane. Always be                   are hazard clues.
prepared to stop.
                                                              Accidents. Accidents are particularly hazardous.
Delivery Trucks Can Present a Hazard.                         People involved in the accident may not look for
Packages or vehicle doors often block the driver's            traffic. Passing drivers tend to look at the accident.
vision. Drivers of step vans, postal vehicles, and            People often run across the road without looking.
local delivery vehicles often are in a hurry and may          Vehicles may slow or stop suddenly.
suddenly step out of their vehicle or drive their
vehicle into the traffic lane.                                Shoppers. People in and around shopping areas
                                                              are often not watching traffic because they are
Parked Vehicles Can Be Hazards, especially                    looking for stores or looking into store windows.
when people start to get out of them. Or, they may
suddenly start up and drive into your way. Watch              Confused Drivers. Confused drivers often change
for movement inside the vehicle or movement of                direction suddenly or stop without warning.
the vehicle itself that shows people are inside.              Confusion is common near freeway or turnpike
Watch for brake lights or backup lights, exhaust,             interchanges and major intersections. Tourists
and other clues that a driver is about to move.               unfamiliar with the area can be very hazardous.
                                                              Clues to tourists include car-top luggage and out-
Be careful of a stopped bus. Passengers may                   of-state license plates. Unexpected actions
cross in front of or behind the bus, and they often           (stopping in the middle of a block, changing lanes
can't see you.                                                for no apparent reason, backup lights suddenly
                                                              going on) are clues to confusion. Hesitation is
Pedestrians and Bicyclists Can Also Be                        another clue, including driving very slowly, using
Hazards. Walkers, joggers, and bicyclists may be              brakes often, or stopping in the middle of an
on the road with their back to the traffic, so they           intersection. You may also see drivers who are
can't see you. Sometimes they wear portable                   looking at street signs, maps, and house numbers.
stereos with headsets, so they can't hear you                 These drivers may not be paying attention to you.
either. This can be dangerous. On rainy days,
pedestrians may not see you because of hats or                Slow Drivers. Motorists who fail to maintain
umbrellas. They may be hurrying to get out of the             normal speed are hazards. Seeing slow moving
rain and may not pay attention to the traffic.                vehicles early can prevent a crash. Some vehicles,
                                                              by their nature, are slow and seeing them is a
Distractions. People who are distracted are                   hazard clue (mopeds, farm machinery,
hazards. Watch for where they are looking. If they            construction machinery, tractors, etc.). Some of
are looking elsewhere, they can't see you. But be             these will have the "slow moving vehicle" symbol to

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-20
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

warn you. This is a red triangle with an orange               they react to this conflict, they may do something
center. Watch for it.                                         that will put them in conflict with you.

Drivers Signaling a Turn May Be a Hazard.
Drivers signaling a turn may slow more than
expected or stop. If they are making a tight turn
into an alley or driveway, they may go very slowly.
If pedestrians or other vehicles block them, they
may have to stop on the roadway. Vehicles turning
left may have to stop for oncoming vehicles.

Drivers in a Hurry. Drivers may feel your
commercial vehicle is preventing them from getting
where they want to go on time. Such drivers may
pass you without a safe gap in the oncoming
traffic, cutting too close in front of you. Drivers
entering the road may pull in front of you in order to
avoid being stuck behind you, causing you to
brake. Be aware of this and watch for drivers who
are in a hurry.

Impaired Drivers. Drivers who are sleepy, have
had too much to drink, are on drugs, or who are ill
are hazards. Some clues to these drivers are:

Weaving across the road or drifting from one side
to another.

Leaving the road (dropping right wheels onto the
shoulder, or bumping across a curb in a turn).

Stopping at the wrong time (stopping at a green
light, or waiting for too long at a stop).

Open window in cold weather.

Speeding up or slowing down suddenly, driving too
fast or too slow.

Be alert for drunk drivers and sleepy drivers late at
night.

Driver Body Movement as a Clue. Drivers look in
the direction they are going to turn. You may
sometimes get a clue from a driver's head and
body movements that a driver may be going to
make a turn, even though the turn signals aren't
on. Drivers making over-the-shoulder checks may
be going to change lanes. These clues are most
easily seen in motorcyclists and bicyclists. Watch
other road users and try to tell whether they might
do something hazardous.

Conflicts. You are in conflict when you have to
change speed and/or direction to avoid hitting
someone. Conflicts occur at intersections where
vehicles meet, at merges (such as turnpike on
ramps) and where there are needed lane changes
(such as the end of a lane, forcing a move to
another lane of traffic). Other situations include
slow moving or stalled traffic in a traffic lane, and
accident scenes. Watch for other drivers who are
in conflict because they are a hazard to you. When

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-21
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

2.8.4 ­ Always Have a Plan                                    daydreaming or being occupied with other mental
                                                              distractions; and many others.
You should always be looking for hazards.
Continue to learn to see hazards on the road.                 Possible distractions that could occur outside a
However, don't forget why you are looking for the             moving vehicle: outside traffic, vehicles or
hazards--they may turn into emergencies. You look             pedestrians; outside events such as police pulling
for the hazards in order to have time to plan a way           someone over or a crash scene; sunlight/sunset;
out of any emergency. When you see a hazard,                  objects in roadway; road construction; reading
think about the emergencies that could develop                billboards or other road advertisements; and many
and figure out what you would do. Always be                   others.
prepared to take action based on your plans. In
this way, you will be a prepared, defensive driver            2.9.1 ­ The Distracted Driving Crash Problem
who will improve your own safety as well as the
safety of all road users.                                     The Large Truck Crash Causation Study (LTCCS)
                                                              reported that 8 percent of large-truck crashes
    Subsections 2.7 and 2.8                                   occurred when Commercial Motor Vehicle (CMV)
     Test Your Knowledge                                      drivers were externally distracted and 2 percent of
                                                              large truck crashes occurred when the driver was
1.  How do you find out how many seconds of                   internally distracted.

    following distance space you have?                        Approximately 5,500 people are killed each year
                                                              on U.S. roadways and an estimated 448,000 are
2.  If you are driving a 30-foot vehicle at 55                injured in motor vehicle crashes involving
                                                              distracted driving (NHTSA Traffic Safety Facts:
    mph, how many seconds of following                        Distracted Driving).

    distance should you allow?                                Research indicates that the burden of talking on a
                                                              cell phone - even if it's hands-free - saps the brain
3.  You should decrease your following                        of 39% of the energy it would ordinarily devote to
                                                              safe driving. Drivers who use a hand-held device
    distance if somebody is following you too                 are more likely to get into a crash serious enough
                                                              to cause injury. (NHTSA distracted driving
    closely. True or False?                                   website, www.distraction.gov).

4.  If you swing wide to the left before turning              2.9.2 ­ Effects of Distracted Driving

    right, another driver may try to pass you on              Effects of distracted driving include slowed
                                                              perception, which may cause you to be delayed in
    the right. True or False?                                 perceiving or completely fail to perceive an
                                                              important traffic event; delayed decision making
5.  What is a hazard?                                         and improper action, which can cause you to be
                                                              delayed in taking the proper action or make
6.  Why make emergency plans when you see                     incorrect inputs to the steering, accelerator or
                                                              brakes.
    a hazard?
                                                              2.9.3 ­ Types of Distractions
These questions may be on the test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.7 and 2.8              There are many causes of distraction, all with the
                                                              potential to increase risk.
2.9 ­ Distracted Driving
                                                              Physical distraction ­ one that causes you to
A driver distraction is anything that takes your              take your hands off the wheel or eyes off the road,
attention away from driving. Whenever you are                 such as reaching for an object.
driving a vehicle and your full attention is not on
the driving task, you are putting yourself, your              Mental distraction ­ activities that take your mind
passengers, other vehicles, and pedestrians in                away from the road, such as engaging in
danger. Distracted driving can cause collisions,              conversation with a passenger or thinking about
resulting in injury, death or property damage.                something that happened during the day.

Activities inside of the vehicle that can distract your       Both physical and mental distraction ­ even
attention include: talking to passengers; adjusting           greater chance a crash could happen, such as
the radio, CD player or climate controls; eating,             talking on a cell phone; or sending or reading text
drinking or smoking; reading maps or other                    messages.
literature; picking up something that fell; talking on
a cell phone or CB radio; reading or sending text
messages; using any type of telematic or electronic
devices (such as navigation systems, pagers,
personal digital assistant, computers, etc.);

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-22
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

2.9.4 ­ Cell/Mobile Phones                                    Your primary responsibility is to operate a motor
                                                              vehicle safely. To do this, you must focus your full
49 CFR Part 383, 384, 390, 391 and 392 of the                 attention on the driving task.
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations                      Note that hands-free devices are no less likely than
(FMCSRs) and the Hazardous Materials                          hand-held cell phones to cause you to become
Regulations (HMR) restricts the use of hand-held              distracted. Attention is diverted from the driving
mobile telephones by drivers of commercial motor              task while using either device.
vehicles (CMVs); and implements new driver
disqualification sanctions for drivers of CMVs who            2.9.5 ­Texting
fail to comply with this Federal restriction; or who
have multiple convictions for violating a State or            49 CFR Part 383, 384, 390, 391, 392, the Federal
local law or ordinance on motor vehicle traffic               Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR)
control that restricts the use of hand-held mobile            prohibits texting by commercial motor vehicle
telephones. Additionally, motor carriers are                  (CMV) drivers while operating in interstate
prohibited from requiring or allowing drivers of              commerce; and implements new driver
CMVs to use hand-held mobile telephones.                      disqualification sanctions for drivers of CMVs who
                                                              fail to comply with this Federal prohibition; or who
The use of hand-held mobile telephones means,                 have multiple convictions for violating a State or
``using at least one hand to hold a mobile                    local law or ordinance on motor vehicle traffic
telephone to conduct a voice communication;                   control that prohibits texting while driving.
"dialing a mobile telephone by pressing more than             Additionally, motor carriers are prohibited from
a single button"; or "moving from a seated driving            requiring or allowing their drivers to engage in
position while restrained by a seat belt to reach for         texting while driving.
a mobile telephone". If you choose to use a mobile
phone while operating a CMV, you may only use a               Texting means manually entering text into, or
hands free mobile phone that is located close to              reading text from, an electronic device. This
you and that can be operated in compliance with               includes, but is not limited to, short message
the rule to conduct a voice communication.                    service, e-mailing, instant messaging, a command
                                                              or request to access a World Wide Web page, or
Your CDL will be disqualified after two or more               engaging in any other form of electronic text
convictions of any state law on hand-held mobile              retrieval or entry, for present or future
telephone use while operating a CMV.                          communication.
Disqualification is 60 days for the second offense
within 3 years and 120 days for three or more                 Electronic device includes, but is not limited to, a
offenses within 3 years. In addition, the first and           cellular telephone; personal digital assistant;
each subsequent violation of such a prohibition are           pager; computer; or any other device used to
subject to civil penalties imposed on such drivers,           enter, write, send, receive, or read text.
in an amount up to $2,750. Motor carriers must not
allow nor require drivers to use a hand-held mobile           Your CDL will be disqualified after two or more
telephone while driving. Employers may also be                convictions of any state law on texting while
subject to civil penalties in an amount up to                 operating a CMV. Disqualification is 60 days for the
$11,000. There is an emergency exception that                 second offense within 3 years and 120 days for
allows you to use your hand-held mobile                       three or more offenses within 3 years. In addition,
telephones if necessary to communicate with law               the first and each subsequent violation of such a
enforcement officials or other emergency services.            prohibition are subject to civil penalties imposed on
                                                              such drivers, in an amount up to $2,750. No motor
Research shows that the odds of being involved in             carrier shall allow or require its drivers to engage in
a safety-critical event (e.g., crash, near-crash,             texting while driving. There is an emergency
unintentional lane deviation) is 6 times greater for          exception that allows you text if necessary to
CMV drivers who engage in dialing a mobile                    communicate with law enforcement officials or
telephone while driving than for those who do not.            other emergency services.
Dialing drivers took their eyes off the forward
roadway for an average of 3.8 seconds. At 55 mph              Evidence suggests that text messaging is even
(or 80.7 feet per second), this equates to a driver           riskier than talking on a cell phone because it
traveling 306 feet, the approximate length of a               requires you to look at a small screen and
football field, without looking at the roadway.               manipulate the keypad with one's hands. Texting
                                                              is the most alarming distraction because it involves
                                                              both physical and mental distraction
                                                              simultaneously.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-23
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Research shows that the odds of being involved in             Avoid smoking, eating and drinking while you drive.
a safety-critical event (e.g., crash, near-crash,             Leave early to allow yourself time to stop to eat.
unintentional lane deviation) is 23.2 times greater           Don't engage in complex or emotionally intense
for CMV drivers who engage in texting while                   conversations with other occupants.
driving than for those who do not. Sending or
receiving text takes your eyes from the road for an           Secure commitment from other occupants to
average of 4.6 seconds. At 55 mph, you would                  behave responsibly and to support the driver in
travel 371 feet, or the length of an entire football          reducing distractions.
field ­ without looking at the roadway.
                                                              2.9.7 ­ Watch Out for Other Distracted Drivers
2.9.6 ­ Don't Drive Distracted
                                                              You need to be able to recognize other drivers who
Your goal should be to eliminate all in-vehicle               are engaged in any form of driving distraction. Not
distractions before driving begins. Accomplishing             recognizing other distracted drivers can prevent
this goal can be done by:                                     you from perceiving or reacting correctly in time to
Assessing all potential in-vehicle distractions               prevent a crash. Watch for:
before driving                                                Vehicles that may drift over the lane divider lines or
                                                              within their own lane.
Developing a preventative plan to reduce/eliminate            Vehicles traveling at inconsistent speeds.
possible distractions                                         Drivers who are preoccupied with maps, food,
                                                              cigarettes, cell phones, or other objects.
Expecting distractions to occur                               Drivers who appear to be involved in conversations
                                                              with their passengers.
Discussing possible scenarios before getting
behind the wheel                                              Give a distracted driver plenty of room and
                                                              maintain your safe following distance.
Based on the assessment of potential distractions,
you can formulate a preventative plan to                      Be very careful when passing a driver who seems
reduce/eliminate possible distractions.                       to be distracted. The other driver may not be aware
                                                              of your presence, and they may drift in front of you.
If drivers react a half-second slower because of
distractions, crashes double. Some tips to follow so          2.10 ­ Aggressive Drivers/Road Rage
you won't become distracted:
                                                              2.10.1 ­ What Is It?
Turn off all communication devices.
                                                              Aggressive driving and road rage is not a new
If you must use a mobile phone, make sure it is               problem. However, in today's world, where heavy
within close proximity, that it is operable while you         and slow-moving traffic and tight schedules are the
are restrained, use an earpiece or the speaker                norm, more and more drivers are taking out their
phone function, use voice-activated dialing; or use           anger and frustration in their vehicles.
the hands-free feature. Drivers are not in
compliance if they unsafely reach for a mobile                Crowded roads leave little room for error, leading
phone, even if they intend to use the hands-free              to suspicion and hostility among drivers and
function.                                                     encouraging them to take personally the mistakes
                                                              of other drivers.
Do not type or read a text message on a mobile
device while driving.                                         Aggressive driving is the act of operating a motor
                                                              vehicle in a selfish, bold, or pushy manner, without
Familiarize yourself with your vehicle's features             regard for the rights or safety of others.
and equipment, before you get behind the wheel.
                                                              Road rage is operating a motor vehicle with the
Adjust all vehicle controls and mirrors to your               intent of doing harm to others or physically
preferences prior to driving.                                 assaulting a driver or their vehicle.

Pre-program radio stations and pre-load your                  2.10.2 ­ Don't Be an Aggressive Driver
favorite CDs.
                                                              How you feel before you even start your vehicle
Clear the vehicle of any unnecessary objects and              has a lot to do with how stress will affect you while
secure cargo.                                                 driving.

Review maps, program the GPS and plan your
route before you begin driving.

Don't attempt to read or write while you drive.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-24
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Reduce your stress before and while you drive.                1. What are some tips to follow so you won't
Listen to "easy listening" music.                                  become a distracted driver?

Give the drive your full attention. Don't allow               2. How do you use in-vehicle communications
yourself to become distracted by talking on your                   equipment cautiously?
cell phone, eating, etc.
                                                              3. How do you recognize a distracted driver?
Be realistic about your travel time. Expect delays            4. What is the difference between aggressive
because of traffic, construction, or bad weather
and make allowances.                                               driving and road rage?
                                                              5. What should you do when confronted with an
If you're going to be later than you expected ­ deal
with it. Take a deep breath and accept the delay.                  aggressive driver?
                                                              6. What are some things you can do to reduce
Give other drivers the benefit of the doubt. Try to
imagine why he or she is driving that way.                         your stress before and while you drive?
Whatever their reason, it has nothing to do with
you.                                                          These questions may be on the test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read subsections 2.9 and 2.10.
Slow down and keep your following distance
reasonable.                                                   2.11 ­ Driving at Night

Don't drive slowly in the left lane of traffic.               2.11.1 ­ It's More Dangerous

Avoid gestures. Keep your hands on the wheel.                 You are at greater risk when you drive at night.
Avoid making any gestures that might anger                    Drivers can't see hazards as quickly as in daylight,
another driver, even seemingly harmless                       so they have less time to respond. Drivers caught
expressions of irritation like shaking your head.             by surprise are less able to avoid a crash.
                                                              The problems of night driving involve the driver, the
Be a cautious and courteous driver. If another                roadway, and the vehicle.
driver seems eager to get in front of you, say, "Be
my guest." This response will soon become a habit             2.11.2 ­ Driver Factors
and you won't be as offended by other drivers'
actions.                                                      Vision. Good vision is critical for safe driving.
                                                              Your control of the brake, accelerator, and steering
2.10.3 ­ What You Should Do When Confronted                   wheel is based on what you see. If you cannot see
by an Aggressive Driver                                       clearly, you will have trouble identifying traffic and
                                                              roadway conditions, spotting potential trouble or
First and foremost, make every attempt to get out             responding to problems in a timely manner.
of their way.
                                                              Because seeing well is so critical to safe driving,
Put your pride in the back seat. Do not challenge             you should have your eyes checked regularly by
them by speeding up or attempting to hold-your-               an eye specialist. You may never know you have
own in your travel lane.                                      poor vision unless your eyes are tested. If you
                                                              need to wear glasses or contact lenses for driving,
Avoid eye contact.                                            remember to:

Ignore gestures and refuse to react to them.                  Always wear them when driving, even if driving
                                                              short distances. If your driver license says
Report aggressive drivers to the appropriate                  corrective lenses are required, it is illegal to move
authorities by providing a vehicle description,               a vehicle without using corrective lenses.
license number, location and, if possible, direction
of travel.                                                    Keep an extra set of corrective lenses in your
                                                              vehicle. If your normal corrective lenses are
If you have a cell phone, and can do it safely, call          broken or lost, you can use the spare lenses to
the police.                                                   drive safely.

If an aggressive driver is involved in a crash farther        Avoid using dark or tinted corrective lenses at
down the road, stop a safe distance from the crash            night, even if you think they help with glare. Tinted
scene, wait for the police to arrive, and report the          lenses cut down the light that you need to see
driving behavior that you witnessed.                          clearly under night driving conditions.

                Subsections 2.9 and 2.10                      Glare. Drivers can be blinded for a short time by
                  Test Your Knowledge                         bright light. . It can take several seconds to recover

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-25
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

from glare. Even two seconds of glare blindness               driver fatality, another three to four people are
can be dangerous. A vehicle going 55 mph will                 killed. (NHTSA, 1994)
travel more than half the distance of a football field
during that time.                                             Warning Signs of Fatigue

Fatigue and Lack of Alertness. Fatigue is                     According to the National Sleep Foundation's
physical or mental tiredness that can be caused by            Sleep in America poll, 60% of Americans have
physical or mental strain, repetitive tasks, illness or       driven while feeling sleepy and 36% admit to
lack of sleep. Just like alcohol and drugs, it                actually having fallen asleep at the wheel in the
impairs your vision and judgment.                             past year. However, many people cannot tell if or
                                                              when they are about to fall asleep. Here are some
Fatigue causes errors related to speed and                    signs that should tell you to stop and rest:
distance, increases your risk of being in a crash,            Difficulty focusing, frequent blinking or heavy
causes you to not see and react to hazards as                 eyelids
quickly; and affects your ability to make critical            Yawning repeatedly or rubbing eyes
decisions. When you are fatigued, you could fall              Day-dreaming; or wandering/disconnected
asleep behind the wheel and crash, injuring or                thoughts
killing yourself or others.                                   Trouble remembering the last few miles driven;
                                                              missing exits or traffic signs
Fatigued or drowsy driving is one of the leading              Trouble keeping head up
causes of traffic collisions. NHTSA estimates that            Drifting from your lane, following too closely or
100,000 police-reported crashes a year are the                hitting a shoulder rumble strip
result of drowsy driving. According to the National           Feeling restless and irritable
Sleep Foundation's Sleep in America poll, 60% of
Americans have driven while feeling sleepy and                When you are tired trying to "push on" is far more
more than one third (36 percent or 103 million                dangerous than most drivers think. It is a major
people) admit to having actually fallen asleep at             cause of fatal accidents. If you notice any signs of
the wheel. Drivers may experience short bursts of             fatigue, stop driving and go to sleep for the night or
sleep lasting only a few seconds or fall asleep for           take a 15 ­ 20 minute nap.
longer periods of time. Either way, the chance of a
collision increases dramatically.                             Are You At Risk?

At-Risk Groups                                                Before you drive, consider whether you are:

The risk of having a crash due to drowsy driving is           Sleep-deprived or fatigued (6 hours of sleep or less
not uniformly distributed across the population.              triples your risk)
Crashes tend to occur at times when sleepiness is
most pronounced, for example, during the night                Suffering from sleep loss (insomnia), poor quality
and in the mid-afternoon. Most people are less                sleep, or a sleep debt
alert at night, especially after midnight. This is
particularly true if you have been driving for a long         Driving long distances without proper rest breaks
time. Thus individuals who drive at night are much
more likely to have fall-asleep crashes.                      Driving through the night, mid-afternoon or when
                                                              you would normally be asleep. Many heavy motor
Research has identified young males, shift                    vehicle accidents occur between midnight and 6
workers, commercial drivers, especially long-haul             a.m.
drivers and people with untreated sleep disorders
or with short-term or chronic sleep deprivation as            Taking sedating medications (antidepressants,
being at increased risk for having a fall-asleep              cold tablets, antihistamines)
crash. At least 15% of all heavy truck crashes
involve fatigue.                                              Working more than 60 hours a week (increases
                                                              your risk by 40%)
A congressionally mandated study of 80 long-haul
truck drivers in the United States and Canada                 Working more than one job, and your main job
found that drivers averaged less than 5 hours of              involves shift work
sleep per day. (Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration, 1996) It is no surprise then that the         Driving alone or on a long, rural, dark or boring
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)                   road
reported that drowsy driving was probably the
cause of more than half of crashes leading to a               Flying, changing time zone
truck driver's death. (NTSB, 1990) For each truck
                                                              Preventing drowsiness before a trip:

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-26
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Get adequate sleep ­ adults need 8 to 9 hours to              Even when there are lights, the road scene can be
maintain alertness                                            confusing. Traffic signals and hazards can be hard
                                                              to see against a background of signs, shop
Prepare route carefully to identify total distance,           windows, and other lights.
stopping points and other logistic considerations             Drive slower when lighting is poor or confusing.
                                                              Drive slowly enough to be sure you can stop in the
Schedule trips for the hours you are normally                 distance you can see ahead.
awake, not the middle of the night

Drive with a passenger

Avoid medications that cause drowsiness

Consult your physician if you suffer from daytime
sleepiness, have difficulty sleeping at night or take
frequent naps

Incorporate exercise into your daily life to give you
more energy.

Maintaining alertness while driving:

Protect yourself from glare and eyestrain with
sunglasses

Keep cool by opening the window or using the air
conditioner

Avoid heavy foods

Be aware of down time during the day

Have another person ride with you, and take turns
driving

Take periodic breaks ­ about every 100 miles or 2
hours during long trips

Stop driving and get some rest or take a nap

Caffeine consumption can increase awareness for
a few hours, but do not drink too much. It will
eventually wear off. Do not rely on caffeine to
prevent fatigue

Avoid drugs. While they may keep you awake for a
while, they won't make you alert.

If you are drowsy, the only safe cure is to get off
the road and get some sleep. If you don't, you risk
your life and the lives of others.

2.11.3 ­ Roadway Factors

Poor Lighting. In the daytime there is usually
enough light to see well. This is not true at night.
Some areas may have bright street lights, but
many areas will have poor lighting. On most roads
you will probably have to depend entirely on your
headlights.

Less light means you will not be able to see
hazards as well as in daytime. Road users who do
not have lights are hard to see. There are many
accidents at night involving pedestrians, joggers,
bicyclists, and animals.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-27
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Drunk Drivers. Drunk drivers and drivers under                your windshield on the inside and outside for safe
the influence of drugs are a hazard to themselves             driving at night.
and to you. Be especially alert around the closing            2.11.5 ­ Night Driving Procedures
times for bars and taverns. Watch for drivers who
have trouble staying in their lane or maintaining             Vehicle Procedures. Make sure you are rested
speed, who stop without reason, or show other                 and alert. If you are drowsy, sleep before you
signs of being under the influence of alcohol or              drive! Even a nap can save your life or the lives of
drugs.                                                        others. If you wear eyeglasses, make sure they are
                                                              clean and unscratched. Don't wear sunglasses at
2.11.4 ­ Vehicle Factors                                      night. Do a complete Vehicle inspection of your
                                                              vehicle. Pay attention to checking all lights and
Headlights. At night your headlights will usually be          reflectors, and cleaning those you can reach.
the main source of light for you to see by and for
others to see you. You can't see nearly as much               Avoid Blinding Others. Glare from your
with your headlights as you see in the daytime.               headlights can cause problems for drivers coming
With low beams you can see ahead about 250 feet               toward you. They can also bother drivers going in
and with high beams about 350-500 feet. You must              the same direction you are, when your lights shine
adjust your speed to keep your stopping distance              in their rearview mirrors. Dim your lights before
within your sight distance. This means going slowly           they cause glare for other drivers. Dim your lights
enough to be able to stop within the range of your            within 500 feet of an oncoming vehicle and when
headlights. Otherwise, by the time you see a                  following another vehicle within 500 feet.
hazard, you will not have time to stop.
                                                              Avoid Glare from Oncoming Vehicles. Do not
Night driving can be more dangerous if you have               look directly at lights of oncoming vehicles. Look
problems with your headlights. Dirty headlights               slightly to the right at a right lane or edge marking,
may give only half the light they should. This cuts           if available. If other drivers don't put their low
down your ability to see, and makes it harder for             beams on, don't try to "get back at them" by putting
others to see you. Make sure your lights are clean            your own high beams on. This increases glare for
and working. Headlights can be out of adjustment.             oncoming drivers and increases the chance of a
If they don't point in the right direction, they won't        crash.
give you a good view and they can blind other
drivers. Have a qualified person make sure they               Use High Beams When You Can. Some drivers
are adjusted properly.                                        make the mistake of always using low beams. This
                                                              seriously cuts down on their ability to see ahead.
Other Lights. In order for you to be seen easily,             Use high beams when it is safe and legal to do so.
the following must be clean and working properly:             Use them when you are not within 500 feet of an
                                                              approaching vehicle. Also, don't let the inside of
Reflectors.                                                   your cab get too bright. This makes it harder to see
                                                              outside. Keep the interior light off, and adjust your
Marker lights.                                                instrument lights as low as you can to still be able
                                                              to read the gauges.
Clearance lights.
                                                              If You Get Sleepy, Stop at the Nearest Safe
Taillights.                                                   Place. People often don't realize how close they
                                                              are to falling asleep even when their eyelids are
Identification lights.                                        falling shut. If you can safely do so, look at yourself
                                                              in a mirror. If you look sleepy, or you just feel
Turn Signals and Brake Lights. At night your turn             sleepy, stop driving! You are in a very dangerous
signals and brake lights are even more important              condition. The only safe cure is to sleep.
for telling other drivers what you intend to do. Make
sure you have clean, working turn signals and stop            2.12 ­ Driving in Fog
lights.
                                                              Fog can occur at any time. Fog on highways can
Windshield and Mirrors. It is more important at               be extremely dangerous. Fog is often unexpected,
night than in the daytime to have a clean                     and visibility can deteriorate rapidly. You should
windshield and clean mirrors. Bright lights at night          watch for foggy conditions and be ready to reduce
can cause dirt on your windshield or mirrors to               your speed. Do not assume that the fog will thin
create a glare of its own, blocking your view. Most           out after you enter it.
people have experienced driving toward the sun
just as it has risen or is about to set, and found that
they can barely see through a windshield that
seemed to look OK in the middle of the day. Clean

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-28
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

The best advice for driving in fog is don't. It is            Use windshield washer antifreeze to prevent
preferable that you pull off the road into a rest area        freezing of the washer liquid. If you can't see well
or truck stop until visibility is better. If you must         enough while driving (for example, if your wipers
drive, be sure to consider the following:                     fail), stop safely and fix the problem.

Obey all fog-related warning signs.                           Tires. Make sure you have enough tread on your
                                                              tires. The drive tires must provide traction to push
Slow down before you enter fog.                               the rig over wet pavement and through snow. The
                                                              steering tires must have traction to steer the
Use low-beam headlights and fog lights for best               vehicle. Enough tread is especially important in
visibility even in daytime, and be alert for other            winter conditions. You must have at least 4/32 inch
drivers who may have forgotten to turn on their               tread depth in every major groove on front tires
lights.                                                       and at least 2/32 inch on other tires. More would
                                                              be better. Use a gauge to determine if you have
Turn on your 4-way flashers. This will give vehicles          enough tread for safe driving.
approaching you from behind a quicker opportunity
to notice your vehicle.                                       Tire Chains. You may find yourself in conditions
                                                              where you can't drive without chains, even to get to
Watch for vehicles on the side of the roadway.                a place of safety. Carry the right number of chains
Seeing taillights or headlights in front of you may           and extra cross-links. Make sure they will fit your
not be a true indication of where the road is ahead           drive tires. Check the chains for broken hooks,
of you. The vehicle may not be on the road at all.            worn or broken cross-links, and bent or broken
                                                              side chains. Learn how to put the chains on before
Use roadside highway reflectors as guides to                  you need to do it in snow and ice.
determine how the road may curve ahead of you.
                                                              Lights and Reflectors. Make sure the lights and
Listen for traffic you cannot see.                            reflectors are clean. Lights and reflectors are
                                                              especially important during bad weather. Check
Avoid passing other vehicles.                                 from time to time during bad weather to make sure
                                                              they are clean and working properly.
Don't stop along the side of the road, unless
absolutely necessary.                                         Windows and Mirrors. Remove any ice, snow,
                                                              etc., from the windshield, windows, and mirrors
2.13 ­ Driving in Winter                                      before starting. Use a windshield scraper, snow
                                                              brush, and windshield defroster as necessary.
2.13.1 ­ Vehicle Checks
Make sure your vehicle is ready before driving in             Hand Holds, Steps, and Deck Plates. Remove all
winter weather. You should make a regular Vehicle             ice and snow from hand holds, steps, and deck
inspection, paying extra attention to the following           plates. This will reduce the danger of slipping.
items.
Coolant Level and Antifreeze Amount. Make                     Radiator Shutters and Winterfront. Remove ice
sure the cooling system is full and there is enough           from the radiator shutters. Make sure the
antifreeze in the system to protect against freezing.         winterfront is not closed too tightly. If the shutters
This can be checked with a special coolant tester.            freeze shut or the winterfront is closed too much,
                                                              the engine may overheat and stop.
Defrosting and Heating Equipment. Make sure
the defrosters work. They are needed for safe                 Exhaust System. Exhaust system leaks are
driving. Make sure the heater is working, and that            especially dangerous when cab ventilation may be
you know how to operate it. If you use other                  poor (windows rolled up, etc.). Loose connections
heaters and expect to need them (e.g., mirror                 could permit poisonous carbon monoxide to leak
heaters, battery box heaters, fuel tank heaters),             into your vehicle. Carbon monoxide gas will cause
check their operation.                                        you to be sleepy. In large enough amounts it can
                                                              kill you. Check the exhaust system for loose parts
Wipers and Washers. Make sure the windshield                  and for sounds and signs of leaks.
wiper blades are in good condition. Make sure the
wiper blades press against the window hard                    2.13.2 ­ Driving
enough to wipe the windshield clean, otherwise
they may not sweep off snow properly. Make sure               Slippery Surfaces. Drive slowly and smoothly on
the windshield washer works and there is washing              slippery roads. If it is very slippery, you shouldn't
fluid in the washer reservoir.                                drive at all. Stop at the first safe place.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-29
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Start Gently and Slowly. When first starting, get             and accelerator at the same time, or you can
the feel of the road. Don't hurry.                            overheat brake drums and linings.)

Check for Ice. Check for ice on the road,                     2.14 ­ Driving in Very Hot Weather
especially bridges and overpasses. A lack of spray
from other vehicles indicates ice has formed on the           2.14.1 ­ Vehicle Checks
road. Also, check your mirrors and wiper blades for           Do a normal Vehicle inspection, but pay special
ice. If they have ice, the road most likely will be icy       attention to the following items.
as well.
                                                              Tires. Check the tire mounting and air pressure.
Adjust Turning and Braking to Conditions.                     Inspect the tires every two hours or every 100
Make turns as gently as possible. Don't brake any             miles when driving in very hot weather. Air
harder than necessary, and don't use the engine               pressure increases with temperature. Do not let air
brake or speed retarder. (They can cause the                  out or the pressure will be too low when the tires
driving wheels to skid on slippery surfaces.)                 cool off. If a tire is too hot to touch, remain stopped
                                                              until the tire cools off. Otherwise the tire may blow
Adjust Speed to Conditions. Don't pass slower                 out or catch fire.
vehicles unless necessary. Go slowly and watch
far enough ahead to keep a steady speed. Avoid                Engine Oil. The engine oil helps keep the engine
having to slow down and speed up. Take curves at              cool, as well as lubricating it. Make sure there is
slower speeds and don't brake while in curves. Be             enough engine oil. If you have an oil temperature
aware that as the temperature rises to the point              gauge, make sure the temperature is within the
where ice begins to melt, the road becomes even               proper range while you are driving.
more slippery. Slow down more.
                                                              Engine Coolant. Before starting out, make sure
Adjust Space to Conditions. Don't drive                       the engine cooling system has enough water and
alongside other vehicles. Keep a longer following             antifreeze according to the engine manufacturer's
distance. When you see a traffic jam ahead, slow              directions. (Antifreeze helps the engine under hot
down or stop to wait for it to clear. Try hard to             conditions as well as cold conditions.) When
anticipate stops early and slow down gradually.               driving, check the water temperature or coolant
Watch for snowplows, as well as salt and sand                 temperature gauge from time to time. Make sure
trucks, and give them plenty of room.                         that it remains in the normal range. If the gauge
                                                              goes above the highest safe temperature, there
Wet Brakes. When driving in heavy rain or deep                may be something wrong that could lead to engine
standing water, your brakes will get wet. Water in            failure and possibly fire. Stop driving as soon as
the brakes can cause the brakes to be weak, to                safely possible and try to find out what is wrong.
apply unevenly, or to grab. This can cause lack of
braking power, wheel lockups, pulling to one side             Some vehicles have sight glasses, see-through
or the other, and jackknife if you pull a trailer.            coolant overflow containers, or coolant recovery
                                                              containers. These permit you to check the coolant
Avoid driving through deep puddles or flowing                 level while the engine is hot. If the container is not
water if possible. If not, you should:                        part of the pressurized system, the cap can be
                                                              safely removed and coolant added even when the
Slow down and place transmission in a low gear.               engine is at operating temperature.
                                                              Never remove the radiator cap or any part of the
Gently put on the brakes. This presses linings                pressurized system until the system has cooled.
against brake drums or discs and keeps mud, silt,             Steam and boiling water can spray under pressure
sand, and water from getting in.                              and cause severe burns. If you can touch the
                                                              radiator cap with your bare hand, it is probably cool
Increase engine rpm and cross the water while                 enough to open.
keeping light pressure on the brakes.
                                                              If coolant has to be added to a system without a
When out of the water, maintain light pressure on             recovery tank or overflow tank, follow these steps:
the brakes for a short distance to heat them up and
dry them out.                                                 Shut engine off.

Make a test stop when safe to do so. Check                    Wait until engine has cooled.
behind to make sure no one is following, then
apply the brakes to be sure they work well. If not,           Protect hands (use gloves or a thick cloth).
dry them out further as described above.
(CAUTION: Do not apply too much brake pressure                Turn radiator cap slowly to the first stop, which
                                                              releases the pressure seal.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-30
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Step back while pressure is released from cooling             2.15 ­ Railroad-highway Crossings
system.
                                                              Railroad-highway grade crossings are a special
When all pressure has been released, press down               kind of intersection where the roadway crosses
on the cap and turn it further to remove it.                  train tracks. These crossings are always
                                                              dangerous. Every such crossing must be
Visually check level of coolant and add more                  approached with the expectation that a train is
coolant if necessary.                                         coming. It is extremely difficult to judge the
                                                              distance of the train from the crossing as well as
Replace cap and turn all the way to the closed                the speed of an approaching train.
position.
                                                              2.15.1 ­ Types of Crossings
Engine Belts. Learn how to check v-belt tightness
on your vehicle by pressing on the belts. Loose               Passive Crossings. This type of crossing does
belts will not turn the water pump and/or fan                 not have any type of traffic control device. The
properly. This will result in overheating. Also, check        decision to stop or proceed rests entirely in your
belts for cracking or other signs of wear.                    hands. Passive crossings require you to recognize
                                                              the crossing, search for any train using the tracks
Hoses. Make sure coolant hoses are in good                    and decide if there is sufficient clear space to cross
condition. A broken hose while driving can lead to            safely.
engine failure and even fire.
                                                              Active Crossings. This type of crossing has a
2.14.2 ­ Driving                                              traffic control device installed at the crossing to
                                                              regulate traffic at the crossing. These active
Watch for Bleeding Tar. Tar in the road pavement              devices include flashing red lights, with or without
frequently rises to the surface in very hot weather.          bells and flashing red lights with bells and gates.
Spots where tar "bleeds" to the surface are very
slippery.                                                     2.15.2 ­ Warning Signs and Devices

Go Slowly Enough to Prevent Overheating.                      Advance Warning Signs. The round, black-on-
High speeds create more heat for tires and the                yellow warning sign is placed ahead of a public
engine. In desert conditions the heat may build up            railroad-highway crossing. The advance warning
to the point where it is dangerous. The heat will             sign tells you to slow down, look and listen for the
increase chances of tire failure or even fire, and            train, and be prepared to stop at the tracks if a train
engine failure.                                               is coming. All passenger and hazmat carrying
                                                              vehicles are required to stop. See Figure 2.15.
Subsections 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, and 2.14
                  Test Your Knowledge

1. You should use low beams whenever you                      Figure 2.15
      can. True or False?

2. What should you do before you drive if you
      are drowsy?

3. What effects can wet brakes cause? How can
      you avoid these problems?

4. You should let air out of hot tires so the
      pressure goes back to normal. True or False?

5. You can safely remove the radiator cap as
      long as the engine isn't overheated. True or
      False?

These questions may be on the test. If you can't
answer all of them, re-read subsections 2.11, 2.12,
2.13, and 2.14.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                                 Page 2-31
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Pavement Markings. Pavement markings mean                     Flashing Red Light Signals. At many highway-rail
the same as the advance warning sign. They                    grade crossings, the cross-buck sign has flashing
consist of an "X" with the letters ""RR" and a no-            red lights and bells. When the lights begin to flash,
passing marking on two-lane roads. See Figure                 stop! A train is approaching. You are required to
2.16.                                                         yield the right-of-way to the train. If there is more
                                                              than one track, make sure all tracks are clear
                                                              before crossing. See Figure 2.18.

                                                              Gates. Many railroad-highway crossings have
                                                              gates with flashing red lights and bells. Stop when
                                                              the lights begin to flash and before the gate lowers
                                                              across the road lane. Remain stopped until the
                                                              gates go up and the lights have stopped flashing.
                                                              Proceed when it is safe. See Figure 2.18.

                          Figure 2.16                                                   Figure 2.18
There is also a no passing zone sign on two-lane
roads. There may be a white stop line painted on              2.15.3 ­ Driving Procedures
the pavement before the railroad tracks. The front
of the school bus must remain behind this line                Never Race a Train to a Crossing. Never attempt
while stopped at the crossing.                                to race a train to a crossing. It is extremely difficult
Cross-buck Signs. This sign marks the grade                   to judge the speed of an approaching train.
crossing. It requires you to yield the right-of-way to
the train. If there is no white stop line painted on          Reduce Speed. Speed must be reduced in
the pavement, vehicles that are required to stop              accordance with your ability to see approaching
must stop no closer than 15 feet or more than 50              trains in any direction, and speed must be held to a
feet from the nearest rail of the nearest track.              point which will permit you to stop short of the
When the road crosses over more than one track,               tracks in case a stop is necessary.
a sign below the cross-buck indicates the number
of tracks. See Figure 2.17.                                   Don't Expect to Hear a Train. Trains may not or
                                                              are prohibited from sounding horns when
                          Figure2.17                          approaching some crossings. Public crossings
                                                              where trains do not sound horns should be
Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    identified by signs. Noise inside your vehicle may,
Version: July 2014                                            also prevent you from hearing the train horn until
                                                              the train is dangerously close to the crossing.

                                                              Don't Rely on Signals. You should not rely solely
                                                              upon the presence of warning signals, gates, or

                                                                                                                                    Page 2-32
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

flagmen to warn of the approach of trains. Be                 emergency notification information. Call 911 or
especially alert at crossings that do not have gates          other emergency number. Give the location of the
or flashing red light signals.                                crossing using all identifiable landmarks, especially
                                                              the DOT number, if posted.
Double Tracks Require a Double Check.
Remember that a train on one track may hide a                 2.16 ­ Mountain Driving
train on the other track. Look both ways before
crossing. After one train has cleared a crossing, be          In mountain driving, gravity plays a major role. On
sure no other trains are near before starting across          any upgrade, gravity slows you down. The steeper
the tracks.                                                   the grade, the longer the grade, and/or the heavier
                                                              the load--the more you will have to use lower gears
Yard Areas and Grade Crossings in Cities and                  to climb hills or mountains. In coming down long,
Towns. Yard areas and grade crossings in cities               steep downgrades, gravity causes the speed of
and towns are just as dangerous as rural grade                your vehicle to increase. You must select an
crossings. Approach them with as much caution.                appropriate safe speed, then use a low gear, and
                                                              proper braking techniques. You should plan ahead
2.15.4 ­ Stopping Safely at Railroad- highway                 and obtain information about any long, steep
Crossings                                                     grades along your planned route of travel. If
                                                              possible, talk to other drivers who are familiar with
A full stop is required at grade crossings whenever:          the grades to find out what speeds are safe.

The nature of the cargo makes a stop mandatory                You must go slowly enough so your brakes can
under state or federal regulations.                           hold you back without getting too hot. If the brakes
                                                              become too hot, they may start to "fade." This
Such a stop is otherwise required by law.                     means you have to apply them harder and harder
                                                              to get the same stopping power. If you continue to
When stopping be sure to:                                     use the brakes hard, they can keep fading until you
                                                              cannot slow down or stop at all.
Check for traffic behind you while stopping
gradually. Use a pullout lane, if available.                  2.16.1 ­ Select a "Safe" Speed

Turn on your four-way emergency flashers.                     Your most important consideration is to select a
                                                              speed that is not too fast for the:
2.15.5 ­ Crossing the Tracks
                                                              Total weight of the vehicle and cargo.
Railroad crossings with steep approaches can
cause your unit to hang up on the tracks.                     Length of the grade.

Never permit traffic conditions to trap you in a              Steepness of the grade.
position where you have to stop on the tracks. Be
sure you can get all the way across the tracks                Road conditions.
before you start across. It takes a typical tractor-
trailer unit at least 14 seconds to clear a single            Weather.
track and more than 15 seconds to clear a double
track.                                                        If a speed limit is posted, or there is a sign
                                                              indicating "Maximum Safe Speed," never exceed
Do not shift gears while crossing railroad tracks.            the speed shown. Also, look for and heed warning
                                                              signs indicating the length and steepness of the
2.15.6 ­ Special Situations                                   grade.

Be Aware! These trailers can get stuck on raised              You must use the braking effect of the engine as
crossings:                                                    the principal way of controlling your speed. The
                                                              braking effect of the engine is greatest when it is
Low slung units (lowboy, car carrier, moving van,             near the governed rpms and the transmission is in
possum-belly livestock trailer).                              the lower gears. Save your brakes so you will be
                                                              able to slow or stop as required by road and traffic
Single-axle tractor pulling a long trailer with its           conditions.
landing gear set to accommodate a tandem-axle
tractor.                                                      2.16.2 ­ Select the Right Gear before Starting
                                                              Down the Grade
If for any reason you get stuck on the tracks, get
out of the vehicle and away from the tracks. Check
signposts or signal housing at the crossing for

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-33
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Shift the transmission to a low gear before starting          For example, if your "safe" speed is 40 mph, you
down the grade. Do not try to downshift after your            would not apply the brakes until your speed
speed has already built up. You will not be able to           reaches 40 mph. You now apply the brakes hard
shift into a lower gear. You may not even be able             enough to gradually reduce your speed to 35 mph
to get back into any gear and all engine braking              and then release the brakes. Repeat this as often
effect will be lost. Forcing an automatic                     as necessary until you have reached the end of the
transmission into a lower gear at high speed could            downgrade.
damage the transmission and also lead to loss of
all engine braking effect.                                    Escape ramps have been built on many steep
With older trucks, a rule for choosing gears is to            mountain downgrades. Escape ramps are made to
use the same gear going down a hill that you                  stop runaway vehicles safely without injuring
would need to climb the hill. However, new trucks             drivers and passengers. Escape ramps use a long
have low friction parts and streamlined shapes for            bed of loose, soft material to slow a runaway
fuel economy. They may also have more powerful                vehicle, sometimes in combination with an
engines. This means they can go up hills in higher            upgrade.
gears and have less friction and air drag to hold
them back going down hills. For that reason,                  Know escape ramp locations on your route. Signs
drivers of modern trucks may have to use lower                show drivers where ramp are located. Escape
gears going down a hill than would be required to             ramps save lives, equipment and cargo.
go up the hill. You should know what is right for
your vehicle.                                                          Subsections 2.15 and 2.16
                                                                           Test Your Knowledge
2.16.3 ­ Brake Fading or Failure
                                                              1. What factors determine your selection of a
Brakes are designed so brake shoes or pads rub                     "safe" speed when going down a long, steep
against the brake drum or disks to slow the vehicle.               downgrade?
Braking creates heat, but brakes are designed to
take a lot of heat. However, brakes can fade or fail          2. Why should you be in the proper gear before
from excessive heat caused by using them too                       starting down a hill?
much and not relying on the engine braking effect.
Brake fade is also affected by adjustment. To                 3. Describe the proper braking technique when
safely control a vehicle, every brake must do its                  going down a long, steep downgrade.
share of the work. Brakes out of adjustment will
stop doing their share before those that are in               4. What type of vehicles can get stuck on a
adjustment. The other brakes can then overheat                     railroad-highway crossing?
and fade, and there will not be enough braking
available to control the vehicle. Brakes can get out          5. How long does it take for a typical tractor-
of adjustment quickly, especially when they are                    trailer unit to clear a double track?
used a lot; also, brake linings wear faster when
they are hot. Therefore, brake adjustment must be             These questions may be on the test. If you can't
checked frequently.                                           answer them all, re-read subsections 2.15 and
                                                              2.16.
2.16.4 ­ Proper Braking Technique
                                                              2.17 ­ Driving Emergencies
Remember. The use of brakes on a long and/or
steep downgrade is only a supplement to the                   Traffic emergencies occur when two vehicles are
braking effect of the engine. Once the vehicle is in          about to collide. Vehicle emergencies occur when
the proper low gear, the following are the proper             tires, brakes, or other critical parts fail. Following
braking techniques:                                           the safety practices in this manual can help
                                                              prevent emergencies. But if an emergency does
Apply the brakes just hard enough to feel a definite          happen, your chances of avoiding a crash depend
slowdown.                                                     upon how well you take action. Actions you can
                                                              take are discussed below.
When your speed has been reduced to
approximately five mph below your "safe" speed,               2.17.1 ­ Steering to Avoid a Crash
release the brakes. (This brake application should
last for about three seconds.)                                Stopping is not always the safest thing to do in an
                                                              emergency. When you don't have enough room to
When your speed has increased to your "safe"                  stop, you may have to steer away from what's
speed, repeat steps 1 and 2.                                  ahead. Remember, you can almost always turn to

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-34
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

miss an obstacle more quickly than you can stop.              Then brake very gently to avoid skidding on a
(However, top-heavy vehicles and tractors with                loose surface.
multiple trailers may flip over.)
                                                              Keep One Set of Wheels on the Pavement, if
Keep Both Hands on the Steering Wheel. In                     Possible. This helps to maintain control.
order to turn quickly, you must have a firm grip on
the steering wheel with both hands. The best way              Stay on the Shoulder. If the shoulder is clear,
to have both hands on the wheel, if there is an               stay on it until your vehicle has come to a stop.
emergency, is to keep them there all the time.                Signal and check your mirrors before pulling back
                                                              onto the road.
How to Turn Quickly and Safely. A quick turn
can be made safely, if it's done the right way. Here          Returning to the Road. If you are forced to return
are some points that safe drivers use:                        to the road before you can stop, use the following
                                                              procedure:
Do not apply the brake while you are turning. It's
very easy to lock your wheels while turning. If that          Hold the wheel tightly and turn sharply enough to
happens, you may skid out of control.                         get right back on the road safely. Don't try to edge
                                                              gradually back on the road. If you do, your tires
Do not turn any more than needed to clear                     might grab unexpectedly and you could lose
whatever is in your way. The more sharply you                 control.
turn, the greater the chances of a skid or rollover.
                                                              When both front tires are on the paved surface,
Be prepared to "counter-steer," that is, to turn the          counter-steer immediately. The two turns should
wheel back in the other direction, once you've                be made as a single "steer-counter-steer" move.
passed whatever was in your path. Unless you are
prepared to counter-steer, you won't be able to do            2.17.2 ­ How to Stop Quickly and Safely
it quickly enough. You should think of emergency
steering and counter-steering as two parts of one             If somebody suddenly pulls out in front of you, your
driving action.                                               natural response is to hit the brakes. This is a good
                                                              response if there's enough distance to stop, and
Where to Steer. If an oncoming driver has drifted             you use the brakes correctly.
into your lane, a move to your right is best. If that
driver realizes what has happened, the natural                You should brake in a way that will keep your
response will be to return to his or her own lane.            vehicle in a straight line and allow you to turn if it
                                                              becomes necessary. You can use the "controlled
If something is blocking your path, the best                  braking" method or the "stab braking" method.
direction to steer will depend on the situation.
                                                              Controlled Braking. With this method, you apply
If you have been using your mirrors, you'll know              the brakes as hard as you can without locking the
which lane is empty and can be safely used.                   wheels. Keep steering wheel movements very
                                                              small while doing this. If you need to make a larger
If the shoulder is clear, going right may be best. No         steering adjustment or if the wheels lock, release
one is likely to be driving on the shoulder but               the brakes. Re-apply the brakes as soon as you
someone may be passing you on the left. You will              can.
know if you have been using your mirrors.
                                                              Stab Braking. With this method, you apply your
If you are blocked on both sides, a move to the               brakes all the way and release brakes when
right may be best. At least you won't force anyone            wheels lock up. As soon as the wheels start
into an opposing traffic lane and a possible head-            rolling, apply the brakes fully again. (It can take up
on collision.                                                 to one second for the wheels to start rolling after
                                                              you release the brakes. If you re-apply the brakes
Leaving the Road. In some emergencies, you                    before the wheels start rolling, the vehicle won't
may have to drive off the road. It may be less risky          straighten out.)
than facing a collision with another vehicle.
                                                              Don't Jam on the Brakes. Emergency braking
Most shoulders are strong enough to support the               does not mean pushing down on the brake pedal
weight of a large vehicle and, therefore, offer an            as hard as you can. That will only keep the wheels
available escape route. Here are some guidelines,             locked up and cause a skid. If the wheels are
if you do leave the road.                                     skidding, you cannot control the vehicle.

Avoid Braking. If possible, avoid using the brakes            2.17.3 ­ Brake Failure
until your speed has dropped to about 20 mph.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-35
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Brakes kept in good condition rarely fail. Most               If no escape ramp is available, take the least
hydraulic brake failures occur for one of two                 hazardous escape route you can--such as an open
reasons: (Air brakes are discussed in Section 5.)             field or a side road that flattens out or turns uphill.
                                                              Make the move as soon as you know your brakes
Loss of hydraulic pressure.                                   don't work. The longer you wait, the faster the
                                                              vehicle will go, and the harder it will be to stop.
Brake fade on long hills.
                                                              2.17.4 ­ Tire Failure
Loss of Hydraulic Pressure. When the system
won't build up pressure, the brake pedal will feel            Recognize Tire Failure. Quickly knowing you
spongy or go to the floor. Here are some things               have a tire failure will let you have more time to
you can do.                                                   react. Having just a few extra seconds to
                                                              remember what it is you're supposed to do can
Downshift. Putting the vehicle into a lower gear              help you. The major signs of tire failure are:
will help to slow the vehicle.

Pump the Brakes. Sometimes pumping the brake
pedal will generate enough hydraulic pressure to
stop the vehicle.

Use the Parking Brake. The parking or
emergency brake is separate from the hydraulic
brake system. Therefore, it can be used to slow the
vehicle. However, be sure to press the release
button or pull the release lever at the same time
you use the emergency brake so you can adjust
the brake pressure and keep the wheels from
locking up.

Find an Escape Route. While slowing the vehicle,
look for an escape route--an open field, side-street,
or escape ramp. Turning uphill is a good way to
slow and stop the vehicle. Make sure the vehicle
does not start rolling backward after you stop. Put
it in low gear, apply the parking brake, and, if
necessary, roll back into some obstacle that will
stop the vehicle.

Brake Failure on Downgrades. Going slow
enough and braking properly will almost always
prevent brake failure on long downgrades. Once
the brakes have failed, however, you are going to
have to look outside your vehicle for something to
stop it.

Your best hope is an escape ramp. If there is one,
there'll be signs telling you about it. Use it. Ramps
are usually located a few miles from the top of the
downgrade. Every year, hundreds of drivers avoid
injury to themselves or damage to their vehicles by
using escape ramps. Some escape ramps use soft
gravel that resists the motion of the vehicle and
brings it to a stop. Others turn uphill, using the hill
to stop the vehicle and soft gravel to hold it in
place.

Any driver who loses brakes going downhill should
use an escape ramp if it's available. If you don't
use it, your chances of having a serious crash may
be much greater.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-36
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Sound. The loud "bang" of a blowout is an easily              ABS works far faster than the driver can respond to
recognized sign. Because it can take a few                    potential wheel lockup. At all other times the brake
seconds for your vehicle to react, you might think it         system will operate normally.
was some other vehicle. But any time you hear a
tire blow, you'd be safest to assume it is yours.             2.18.2 ­ Vehicles Required to Have Antilock
                                                              Braking Systems
Vibration. If the vehicle thumps or vibrates heavily,
it may be a sign that one of the tires has gone flat.         The Department of Transportation requires that
With a rear tire, that may be the only sign you get.          ABS be on:

Feel. If the steering feels "heavy," it is probably a         Truck tractors with air brakes built on or after
sign that one of the front tires has failed.                  March 1, 1997.
Sometimes, failure of a rear tire will cause the
vehicle to slide back and forth or "fishtail."                Other air brake vehicles, (trucks, buses, trailers,
However, dual rear tires usually prevent this.                and converter dollies) built on or after March 1,
                                                              1998.
Respond to Tire Failure. When a tire fails, your
vehicle is in danger. You must immediately:                   Hydraulically braked trucks and buses with a gross
                                                              vehicle weight rating of 10,000 lbs or more built on
Hold the Steering Wheel Firmly. If a front tire               or after March 1, 1999.
fails, it can twist the steering wheel out of your
hand. The only way to prevent this is to keep a firm          Many commercial vehicles built before these dates
grip on the steering wheel with both hands at all             have been voluntarily equipped with ABS.
times.
                                                              2.18.3 ­ How to Know If Your Vehicle Is
Stay off the Brake. It's natural to want to brake in          Equipped with ABS
an emergency. However, braking when a tire has
failed could cause loss of control. Unless you're             Tractors, trucks, and buses will have yellow ABS
about to run into something, stay off the brake until         malfunction lamps on the instrument panel.
the vehicle has slowed down. Then brake very
gently, pull off the road, and stop.                          Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on
                                                              the left side, either on the front or rear corner.
Check the Tires. After you've come to a stop, get
out and check all the tires. Do this even if the              Dollies manufactured on or after March 1, 1998,
vehicle seems to be handling all right. If one of             are required to have a lamp on the left side.
your dual tires goes, the only way you may know it            As a system check on newer vehicles, the
is by getting out and looking at it.                          malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb
                                                              check, and then goes out quickly. On older
2.18 ­ Antilock Braking Systems (ABS)                         systems, the lamp could stay on until you are
                                                              driving over five mph.
ABS is a computerized system that keeps your
wheels from locking up during hard brake                      If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes
applications.                                                 on once you are under way, you may have lost
                                                              ABS control.
ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does
not decrease or increase your normal braking                  In the case of towed units manufactured before it
capability. ABS only activates when wheels are                was required by the Department of Transportation,
about to lock up.                                             it may be difficult to tell if the unit is equipped with
                                                              ABS. Look under the vehicle for the ECU and
ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping                wheel speed sensor wires coming from the back of
distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle               the brakes.
under control during hard braking.
                                                              2.18.4 ­ How ABS Helps You
2.18.1 ­ How Antilock Braking Systems Work
                                                              When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a
Sensors detect potential wheel lock up. An                    vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up.
electronic control unit (ECU) will then decrease              When your steering wheels lock up, you lose
brake pressure to avoid wheel lockup.                         steering control. When your other wheels lock up,
                                                              you may skid, jackknife, or even spin the vehicle.
Brake pressure is adjusted to provide the
maximum braking without danger of lockup.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-37
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up and maintain                Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still
control. You may or may not be able to stop faster            have regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the
with ABS, but you should be able to steer around              system serviced soon.
an obstacle while braking, and avoid skids caused
by over braking.                                              2.18.8 ­ Safety Reminders

2.18.5 ­ ABS on the Tractor Only or Only on the               ABS won't allow you to drive faster, follow more
Trailer                                                       closely, or drive less carefully.

Having ABS on only the tractor, only the trailer, or          ABS won't prevent power or turning skids­ABS
even on only one axle, still gives you more control           should prevent brake-induced skids or jackknifes,
over the vehicle during braking. Brake normally.              but not those caused by spinning the drive wheels
                                                              or going too fast in a turn.
When only the tractor has ABS, you should be able
to maintain steering control, and there is less               ABS won't necessarily shorten stopping
chance of jackknifing. But keep your eye on the               distance. ABS will help maintain vehicle control,
trailer and let up on the brakes (if you can safely do        but not always shorten stopping distance.
so) if it begins to swing out.
                                                              ABS won't increase or decrease ultimate
When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less            stopping power­ABS is an "add-on" to your
likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control         normal brakes, not a replacement for them.
or start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if
you can safely do so) until you regain control.               ABS won't change the way you normally brake.
                                                              Under normal brake conditions, your vehicle will
2.18.6 ­ Braking with ABS                                     stop as it always stopped. ABS only comes into
                                                              play when a wheel would normally have locked up
When you drive a vehicle with ABS, you should                 because of over braking.
brake as you always have. In other words:
                                                              ABS won't compensate for bad brakes or poor
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely           brake maintenance.
and stay in control.
                                                              Remember: The best vehicle safety feature is still
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you                 a safe driver.
have ABS on the bus, tractor, the trailer, or both.
                                                              Remember: Drive so you never need to use your
As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer            ABS.
and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to
stay in control.                                              Remember: If you need it, ABS could help to
                                                              prevent a serious crash.
There is only one exception to this procedure. If
you drive a straight truck or combination with                2.19 ­ Skid Control and Recovery
working ABS on all axles, in an emergency stop,
you can fully apply the brakes.                               A skid happens whenever the tires lose their grip
                                                              on the road. This is caused in one of four ways:
2.18.7 ­ Braking If ABS Is Not Working
                                                              Over-braking. Braking too hard and locking up the
Without ABS you still have normal brake functions.            wheels. Skids also can occur when using the
Drive and brake as you always have.                           speed retarder when the road is slippery.

Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps               Over-steering. Turning the wheels more sharply
to tell you if something isn't working.                       than the vehicle can turn.

As a system check on newer vehicles, the                      Over-acceleration. Supplying too much power to
malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb              the drive wheels, causing them to spin.
check and then goes out quickly. On older
systems, the lamp could stay on until you are                 Driving Too Fast. Most serious skids result from
driving over five mph.                                        driving too fast for road conditions. Drivers who
                                                              adjust their driving to conditions don't over-
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes            accelerate and don't have to over-brake or over-
on once you are under way, you may have lost                  steer from too much speed.
ABS control on one or more wheels.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-38
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

2.19.1 ­ Drive-wheel Skids                                                              Figure 2.19

By far the most common skid is one in which the                    Subsections 2.17, 2.18, and 2.19
rear wheels lose traction through excessive                                Test Your Knowledge
braking or acceleration. Skids caused by
acceleration usually happen on ice or snow.                   1. Stopping is not always the safest thing to do
Taking your foot off the accelerator can easily stop                 in an emergency. True or False?
them. (If it is very slippery, push the clutch in.
Otherwise, the engine can keep the wheels from                2. What are some advantages of going right
rolling freely and regaining traction.)                              instead of left around an obstacle?

Rear wheel braking skids occur when the rear                  3. What is an "escape ramp?"
drive wheels lock. Because locked wheels have                 4. If a tire blows out, you should put the brakes
less traction than rolling wheels, the rear wheels
usually slide sideways in an attempt to "catch up"                   on hard to stop quickly. True or False?
with the front wheels. In a bus or straight truck, the        5. How do you know if your vehicle has antilock
vehicle will slide sideways in a "spin out." With
vehicles towing trailers, a drive-wheel skid can let                 brakes?
the trailer push the towing vehicle sideways,                 6. What is the proper braking technique when
causing a sudden jackknife. See Figure 2.19.
                                                                     driving a vehicle with antilock brakes?
2.19.2 ­ Correcting a Drive-wheel Braking Skid                7. How do antilock brakes help you?

Do the following to correct a drive-wheel braking             These questions may be on the test. If you can't
skid.                                                         answer them all, re-read subsections 2.17, 2.18,
                                                              and 2.19.
Stop Braking. This will let the rear wheels roll
again, and keep the rear wheels from sliding.

Counter-steer. As a vehicle turns back on course,
it has a tendency to keep on turning. Unless you
turn the steering wheel quickly the other way, you
may find yourself skidding in the opposite direction.

Learning to stay off the brake, turn the steering
wheel quickly, push in the clutch, and counter-steer
in a skid takes a lot of practice. The best place to
get this practice is on a large driving range or "skid
pad."

2.19.3 ­ Front-wheel Skids

Driving too fast for conditions causes most front-
wheel skids. Other causes include lack of tread on
the front tires and cargo loaded so not enough
weight is on the front axle. In a front-wheel skid,
the front end tends to go in a straight line
regardless of how much you turn the steering
wheel. On a very slippery surface, you may not be
able to steer around a curve or turn.

When a front-wheel skid occurs, the only way to
stop the skid is to let the vehicle slow down. Stop
turning and/or braking so hard. Slow down as
quickly as possible without skidding.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-39
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

2.20 ­ Accident Procedures                                    The following are some causes of vehicle fires:

When you're in an accident and not seriously hurt,            After Accidents. Spilled fuel, improper use of
you need to act to prevent further damage or                  flares.
injury. The basic steps to be taken at any accident
are to:                                                       Tires. Under-inflated tires and duals that touch.

Protect the area.                                             Electrical System. Short circuits due to damaged
                                                              insulation, loose connections.
Notify authorities.
                                                              Fuel. Driver smoking, improper fueling, loose fuel
Care for the injured.                                         connections.

2.20.1 ­ Protect the Area                                     Cargo. Flammable cargo, improperly sealed or
                                                              loaded cargo, poor ventilation.
The first thing to do at an accident scene is to keep
another accident from happening in the same spot.             2.21.2 ­ Fire Prevention
To protect the accident area:
                                                              Pay attention to the following:
If your vehicle is involved in the accident, try to get
it to the side of the road. This will help prevent            Vehicle Inspection. Make a complete inspection
another accident and allow traffic to move.                   of the electrical, fuel, and exhaust systems, tires,
                                                              and cargo. Be sure to check that the fire
If you're stopping to help, park away from the                extinguisher is charged.
accident. The area immediately around the
accident will be needed for emergency vehicles.               En Route Inspection. Check the tires, wheels,
                                                              and truck body for signs of heat whenever you stop
Put on your flashers.                                         during a trip.

Set out reflective triangles to warn other traffic.           Follow Safe Procedures. Follow correct safety
Make sure other drivers can see them in time to               procedures for fueling the vehicle, using brakes,
avoid the accident.                                           handling flares, and other activities that can cause
                                                              a fire.
2.20.2 ­ Notify Authorities
                                                              Monitoring. Check the instruments and gauges
If you have a cell phone or CB, call for assistance           often for signs of overheating and use the mirrors
before you get out of your vehicle. If not, wait until        to look for signs of smoke from tires or the vehicle.
after the accident scene has been properly
protected, then phone or send someone to phone                Caution. Use normal caution in handling anything
the police. Try to determine where you are so you             flammable.
can give the exact location.
                                                              2.21.3 ­ Fire Fighting
2.20.3 ­ Care for the Injured
If a qualified person is at the accident and helping          Knowing how to fight fires is important. Drivers who
the injured, stay out of the way unless asked to              didn't know what to do have made fires worse.
assist. Otherwise, do the best you can to help any            Know how the fire extinguisher works. Study the
injured parties. Here are some simple steps to                instructions printed on the extinguisher before you
follow in giving assistance:                                  need it. Here are some procedures to follow in
                                                              case of fire.
Don't move a severely injured person unless the
danger of fire or passing traffic makes it necessary.         Pull Off the Road. The first step is to get the
                                                              vehicle off the road and stop. In doing so:
Stop heavy bleeding by applying direct pressure to
the wound.                                                    Park in an open area, away from buildings, trees,
                                                              brush, other vehicles, or anything that might catch
Keep the injured person warm.                                 fire.

2.21 ­ Fires                                                  Don't pull into a service station!

Truck fires can cause damage and injury. Learn                Notify emergency services of your problem and
the causes of fires and how to prevent them. Know             your location.
what to do to extinguish fires.
                                                              Keep the Fire from Spreading. Before trying to
2.21.1 ­ Causes of Fire                                       put out the fire, make sure that it doesn't spread
                                                              any further.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-40
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System                  Class/Type of Fires
                                                              Class Type
With an engine fire, turn off the engine as soon as
you can. Don't open the hood if you can avoid it.                A Wood, Paper, Ordinary Combustibles
Shoot foam through louvers, radiator, or from the
vehicle's underside.                                                       Extinguish by Cooling and
                                                                           Quenching Using Water or Dry
For a cargo fire in a van or box trailer, keep the                         Chemicals
doors shut, especially if your cargo contains
hazardous materials. Opening the van doors will                  B Gasoline, Oil, Grease, Other Greasy
supply the fire with oxygen and can cause it to                            Liquids
burn very fast.
                                                                           Extinguish by Smothering, Cooling
Extinguish the Fire. Here are some rules to follow                         or Heat Shielding using carbon
in putting out a fire:                                                     Dioxide or Dry Chemicals

When using the extinguisher, stay as far away from               C Electrical Equipment Fires
the fire as possible.
                                                                           Extinguish with Non-conducting
Aim at the source or base of the fire, not up in the                       Agents such as Carbon Dioxide or
flames.                                                                    Dry Chemicals. DO NOT USE
                                                                           WATER.
Use the Right Fire Extinguisher
                                                                 D Fires in Combustible Metals
Figures 2.20 and 2.21 detail the type of fire
extinguisher to use by class of fire.                                      Extinguish by Using Specialized
                                                                           Extinguishing Powders
The B:C type fire extinguisher is designed to work
on electrical fires and burning liquids.                                            Figure 2.20

The A:B:C type is designed to work on burning                 Class of Fire/Type of Extinguisher
wood, paper, and cloth as well.
                                                              Class of Fire  Fire Extinguisher Type
Water can be used on wood, paper, or cloth, but
don't use water on an electrical fire (can cause              B or C         Regular Dry Chemical
shock) or a gasoline fire (it will spread the flames).
                                                              A, B, C, or D Multi-Purpose Dry Chemical
A burning tire must be cooled. Lots of water may
be required.                                                  D              Purple K Dry Chemical

If you're not sure what to use, especially on a               B or C          KCL Dry Chemical
hazardous materials fire, wait for firefighters.                 D
                                                                             Dry Powder Special
Position yourself upwind. Let the wind carry the              B or C               Compound
extinguisher to the fire.
                                                                             Carbon Dioxide (Dry)
Continue until whatever was burning has been
cooled. Absence of smoke or flame does not mean
the fire cannot restart.

                                                              B or C         Halogenated Agent (Gas)

                                                              A              Water

                                                              A              Water With Anti-Freeze

                                                              A or B         Water, Loaded Steam Style

                                                              B, On Some A   Foam

                                                                             Figure 2.21

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                                                Page 2-41
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System         100                    What Is a Drink?             Effects
                                                              Drinks    It is the alcohol in drinks that affects human
         Subsections 2.20 and 2.21                                      performance. It doesn't make any difference120140160180200220240
             Test Your Knowledge                                        whether that alcohol comes from "a couple of
                                                                        beers," or from two glasses of wine, or two shots   Only Safe Impairment
1. What are some things to do at an accident                            of hard liquor. Approximate Blood Alcohol        Driving Limit Begins
      scene to prevent another accident?                                Content

2. Name two causes of tire fires.                                                        Body Weight in Pounds
3. What kinds of fires is a B:C extinguisher not
                                                                        0 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00
      good for?
4. When using your extinguisher, should you get

      as close as possible to the fire?
5. Name some causes of vehicle fires.

These questions may be on the test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.20 and 2.21.

2.22 ­ Alcohol, Other Drugs, and                                        1 .04 .03 .03 .02 .02 .02 .02 .02
Driving
                                                                        2 .08 .06 .05 .05 .04 .04 .03 .03              Driving Skills Significantly
2.22.1 ­ Alcohol and Driving                                                                                       Affected
                                                                        3 .11 .09 .08 .07 .06 .06 .05 .05
Drinking alcohol and then driving is very dangerous                                                             Criminal Penalties
and a serious problem. People who drink alcohol                         4 .15 .12 .11 .09 .08 .08 .07 .06
are involved in traffic accidents resulting in over
20,000 deaths every year. Alcohol impairs muscle                        5 .19 .16 .13 .12 .11 .09 .09 .08
coordination, reaction time, depth perception, and
night vision. It also affects the parts of the brain                    6 .23 .19 .16 .14 .13 .11 .10 .09
that control judgment and inhibition. For some
people, one drink is all it takes to show signs of                      7 .26 .22 .19 .16 .15 .13 .12 .11          Legally Intoxicated
impairment.                                                                                                     Criminal Penalties
                                                              8 .30 .25 .21 .19 .17 .15 .14 .13
How Alcohol Works. Alcohol goes directly into the
blood stream and is carried to the brain. After               9 .34 .28 .24 .21 .19 .17 .15 .14
passing through the brain, a small percentage is
removed in urine, perspiration, and by breathing,             1         .38 .31 .27 .23 .21 .19 .17        .16
while the rest is carried to the liver. The liver can         0
only process one-third an ounce of alcohol per
hour, which is considerably less than the alcohol in                    Subtract .01% for each 40 minutes of drinking. One
a standard drink. This is a fixed rate, so only time,                   drink is 1.5 oz. of 80 proof liquor, 12 oz. of beer, or 5
not black coffee or a cold shower, will sober you
up. If you have drinks faster than your body can                                               oz. of table wine.
get rid of them, you will have more alcohol in your
body, and your driving will be more affected. The                                   Figure 2.22
Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) commonly
measures the amount of alcohol in your body. See
Figure 2.22.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                                                                 Page 2-42
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

All of the following drinks contain the same amount                  Effects Of Increasing
of alcohol:                                                         Blood Alcohol Content
A 12-ounce glass of 5% beer.
A 5-ounce glass of 12% wine.                                  Blood Alcohol Content is the amount of alcohol in
A 1 1/2-ounce shot of 80 proof liquor.                        your blood recorded in milligrams of alcohol per
                                                              100 milliliters of blood. Your BAC depends on the
What   Determines           Blood  Alcohol                    amount of blood (which increases with weight)
                                                              and the amount of alcohol you consume over time
Concentration? BAC is determined by the amount                (how fast you drink). The faster you drink, the
                                                              higher your BAC, as the liver can only handle
of alcohol you drink (more alcohol means higher               about one drink per hour--the rest builds up in
                                                              your blood.
BAC), how fast you drink (faster drinking means

higher BAC), and your weight (a small person

doesn't have to drink as much to reach the same               BAC   Effects on Body           Effects on
                                                                                         Driving Condition
BAC).

Alcohol and the Brain. Alcohol affects more and               .02   Mellow feeling,      Less inhibited.
more of the brain as BAC builds up. The first part                  slight body warmth.
of the brain affected controls judgment and self-
control. One of the bad things about this is it can           .05   Noticeable           Less alert, less
keep drinkers from knowing they are getting drunk.                  relaxation.          self-focused,
And, of course, good judgment and self-control are                                       coordination
absolutely necessary for safe driving.                                                   impairment begins.

As BAC continues to build up, muscle control,                 .08   Definite impairment  Drunk driving limit,
vision, and coordination are affected more and                      in coordination &    impaired
more. Effects on driving may include:                               judgment             coordination &
                                                                                         judgment.
Straddling lanes.
                                                                    Noisy, possible
Quick, jerky starts.
                                                              .10*  embarrassing         Reduction in
Not signaling, failure to use lights.                               behavior, mood       reaction time.

Running stop signs and red lights.                                  swings.

Improper passing (See Figure 2.23).                                     Impaired balance &
                                                              .15 movement, clearly Unable to drive.

                                                                        drunk.

                                                              .30   Many lose
                                                                    consciousness.

                                                                        Most lose
                                                              .40 consciousness,

                                                                        some die.

These effects mean increased chances of a crash               .50   Breathing stops,
and chances of losing your driver's license.                        many die.
Accident statistics show that the chance of a crash
is much greater for drivers who have been drinking            BAC of .10 means that 1/10 of 1 % (or 1/1000) of
than for drivers who have not.                                your total blood content is alcohol.

                                                                                 Figure 2.23

How Alcohol Affects Driving. All drivers are                  2.22.2 ­ Other Drugs
affected by drinking alcohol. Alcohol affects
judgment, vision, coordination, and reaction time. It         Besides alcohol, other legal and illegal drugs are
causes serious driving errors, such as:                       being used more often. Laws prohibit possession
                                                              or use of many drugs while on duty. They prohibit
Increased reaction time to hazards.                           being under the influence of any "controlled
                                                              substance," amphetamines (including "pep pills,"
Driving too fast or too slow.                                 "uppers," and "bennies"), narcotics, or any other
                                                              substance, which can make the driver unsafe. This
Driving in the wrong lane.                                    could include a variety of prescription and over-the-
                                                              counter drugs (cold medicines), which may make
Running over the curb.                                        the driver drowsy or otherwise affect safe driving
                                                              ability. However, possession and use of a drug
Weaving.                                                      given to a driver by a doctor is permitted if the
                                                              doctor informs the driver that it will not affect safe
                                                              driving ability.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                                                    Page 2-43
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Pay attention to warning labels for legitimate drugs                 Hazard Class Definitions
and medicines, and to doctor's orders regarding
possible effects. Stay away from illegal drugs.               Class  Class Name       Example
Don't use any drug that hides fatigue--the only cure          1
for fatigue is rest. Alcohol can make the effects of          2                       Ammunition,
other drugs much worse. The safest rule is don't              3
mix drugs with driving at all.                                4      Explosives       Dynamite,
                                                              5
Use of drugs can lead to traffic accidents resulting          6                       Fireworks
in death, injury, and property damage.                        7
Furthermore, it can lead to arrest, fines, and jail           8      Gases            Propane, Oxygen,
sentences. It can also mean the end of a person's             9                       Helium
driving career.
                                                              None   Flammable        Gasoline Fuel,
2.22.3 ­ Illness                                                                      Acetone
                                                              None
Once in a while, you may become so ill that you                      Flammable        Matches, Fuses
cannot operate a motor vehicle safely. If this                       Solids
happens to you, you must not drive. However, in
case of an emergency, you may drive to the                                            Ammonium
nearest place where you can safely stop.
                                                                     Oxidizers        Nitrate, Hydrogen
2.23 ­ Hazardous Materials Rules For
All Commercial Drivers                                                                Peroxide

All drivers should know something about                              Poisons          Pesticides,
hazardous materials. You must be able to                                              Arsenic
recognize hazardous cargo, and you must know
whether or not you can haul it without having a                      Radioactive      Uranium,
hazardous materials endorsement on your CDL                                           Plutonium
license.
                                                                     Corrosives       Hydrochloric Acid,
2.23.1 ­ What Are Hazardous Materials?                                                Battery Acid

Hazardous materials are products that pose a risk                    Miscellaneous    Formaldehyde,
to health, safety, and property during                               Hazardous        Asbestos
transportation. See Figure 2.24.                                     Materials

2.23.2 ­ Why Are There Rules?                                        ORM-D (Other

You must follow the many rules about transporting                    Regulated        Hair Spray or
hazardous materials. The intent of the rules is to:
                                                                     Material-        Charcoal
Contain the product.
                                                                     Domestic)
Communicate the risk.
                                                                     Combustible      Fuel Oils, Lighter
Ensure safe drivers and equipment.
                                                                     Liquids          Fluid
To Contain the Product. Many hazardous
products can injure or kill on contact. To protect            After an accident or hazardous material spill or
drivers and others from contact, the rules tell               leak, you may be injured and unable to
shippers how to package safely. Similar rules tell            communicate the hazards of the materials you are
drivers how to load, transport, and unload bulk               transporting. Firefighters and police can prevent or
tanks. These are containment rules.                           reduce the amount of damage or injury at the
                                                              scene if they know what hazardous materials are
To Communicate the Risk. The shipper uses a                   being transported. Your life, and the lives of others,
shipping paper and diamond shaped hazard labels               may depend on quickly locating the hazardous
to warn dockworkers and drivers of the risk.                  materials shipping papers. For that reason, you
                                                              must identify shipping papers related to hazardous
                          Figure 2.24                         materials or keep them on top of other shipping
                                                              papers. You must also keep shipping papers:

                                                              In a pouch on the driver's door, or

                                                              In clear view within reach while driving, or

                                                              On the driver's seat when out of the vehicle.

                                                              2.23.3 ­ Lists of Regulated Products

                                                              Placards are used to warn others of hazardous

                                                              materials. Placards are signs put on the outside of

                                                              a vehicle that identify the hazard class of the

                                                              cargo. A placarded vehicle must have at least four

                                                              identical placards. They are put on the front, rear,

                                                              and               both                         sides.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                                                                  Page 2-44
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Placards must be readable from all four directions.           The rules require all drivers of placarded vehicles
They must be at least 10 3/4 inches square, turned            to learn how to safely load and transport
upright on a point, in a diamond shape. Cargo                 hazardous products. They must have a commercial
tanks and other bulk packaging display the                    driver license with the hazardous materials
identification number of their contents on placards           endorsement. To get the required endorsement,
or orange panels.                                             you must pass a written test on material found in
                                                              Section 9 of this manual. A tank endorsement is
Identification Numbers are a four digit code used             required for any commercial vehicle that is
by first responders to identify hazardous materials.          designed to transport any liquid or gaseous
An identification number may be used to identify              materials in a tank or tanks having an individual
more than one chemical on shipping papers. The                rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an
identification number will be preceded by the                 aggregate capacity of 1,000 gallons or more that is
letters "NA" or "UN". The US DOT Emergency                    either permanently or temporarily attached to the
Response Guidebook (ERG) lists the chemicals                  vehicle or chassis. The liquid or gas does not have
and the identification numbers assigned to them.              to be a hazardous material.

Not all vehicles carrying hazardous materials need            Drivers who need the hazardous materials
to have placards. The rules about placards are                endorsement must learn the placard rules. If you
given in Section 9 of this manual. You can drive a            do not know if your vehicle needs placards, ask
vehicle that carries hazardous materials if it does           your employer. Never drive a vehicle needing
not require placards. If it requires placards, you            placards unless you have the hazardous materials
cannot drive it unless your driver license has the            endorsement. To do so is a crime. When stopped,
hazardous materials endorsement. See Figure                   you will be cited and you will not be allowed to
2.25.                                                         drive your truck. It will cost you time and money. A
                                                              failure to placard when needed may risk your life
                                                              and others if you have an accident. Emergency
                                                              help will not know of your hazardous cargo.
                                                              Hazardous materials drivers must also know which
                                                              products they can load together, and which they
                                                              cannot. These rules are also in Section 9. Before
                                                              loading a truck with more than one type of product,
                                                              you must know if it is safe to load them together. If
                                                              you do not know, ask your employer and consult
                                                              the regulations.

                                                                       Subsections 2.22 and 2.23
                                                                           Test Your Knowledge

                                                              1. Common medicines for colds can make you
                                                                   sleepy. True or False?

                                                              2. Coffee and a little fresh air will help a drinker
                                                                   sober up. True or False?

                                                              3. What is a hazardous materials placard?
                                                              4. Why are placards used?

                                                              These questions may be on the test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read subsections 2.22 and
                                                              2.23.

Figure 2.25

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-45
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                     THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-2
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 3                                          After you have driven for 3 hours or 150 miles.
TRANSPORTING CARGO
                                                              After every break you take during driving.
             SAFELY
                                                              Federal, state, and local regulations for commercial
This Section Covers                                           vehicle weight, securing cargo, covering loads, and
                                                              where you can drive large vehicles vary from place
 Inspecting Cargo                                             to place. Know the rules where you will be driving.
 Cargo Weight and Balance
 Securing Cargo                                               3.2 ­ Weight and Balance
 Cargo Needing Special Attention
                                                              You are responsible for not being overloaded. The
This section tells you about hauling cargo safely.            following are some definitions of weight you should
You must understand basic cargo safety rules to               know.
get a CDL.
                                                              3.2.1 ­ Definitions You Should Know
If you load cargo wrong or do not secure it, it can
be a danger to others and yourself. Loose cargo               Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR). The value
that falls off a vehicle can cause traffic problems           specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight
and others could be hurt or killed. Loose cargo               of a single vehicle.
could hurt or kill you during a quick stop or crash.
Your vehicle could be damaged by an overload.                 Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR). The
Steering could be affected by how a vehicle is                value specified by the manufacturer of the power
loaded, making it more difficult to control the               unit, if the value is displayed on the Federal Motor
vehicle.                                                      Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS) certification
                                                              label; or the sum of the gross vehicle weight
Whether or not you load and secure the cargo                  ratings (GVWRs) or the gross vehicle weights
yourself, you are responsible for:                            (GVWs) of the power unit and the towed unit(s), or
                                                              any combination thereof, that produces the highest
Inspecting your cargo.                                        value.

Recognizing overloads and poorly balanced                     (The underlined and italicized text above is for
weight.                                                       use by roadside enforcement only to determine
                                                              whether the driver/vehicle is subject to CDL
Knowing your cargo is properly secured and does               regulations. It is not used to determine
not obscure your view ahead or to the sides.                  whether a vehicle is representative for the
                                                              purposes of Skills testing).
Knowing your cargo does not restrict your access
to emergency equipment.                                       Axle Weight. The weight transmitted to the ground
                                                              by one axle or one set of axles.
If you intend to carry hazardous material that
requires placards on your vehicle, you will also              Tire Load. The maximum safe weight a tire can
need to have a hazardous materials endorsement.               carry at a specified pressure. This rating is stated
Section 9 of this manual has the information you              on the side of each tire.
need to pass the hazardous materials test.
                                                              Suspension Systems. Suspension systems have
3.1 ­ Inspecting Cargo                                        a manufacturer's weight capacity rating.

As part of your Vehicle inspection, make sure the             Coupling Device Capacity. Coupling devices are
truck is not overloaded and the cargo is balanced             rated for the maximum weight they can pull and/or
and secured properly.                                         carry.

After Starting. Inspect the cargo and its securing            3.2.2 ­ Legal Weight Limits
devices again within the first 50 miles after
beginning a trip. Make any adjustments needed.                You must keep weights within legal limits. States
                                                              have maximums for GVWRs, GCWRs, and axle
Re-check. Re-check the cargo and securing                     weights. Often, maximum axle weights are set by a
devices as often as necessary during a trip to keep           bridge formula. A bridge formula permits less
the load secure. You need to inspect again:                   maximum axle weight for axles that are closer

Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely                                                                                                Page 3-1
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

together. This is to prevent overloading bridges
and roadways.

Overloading can have bad effects on steering,
braking, and speed control. Overloaded trucks
have to go very slowly on upgrades. Worse, they
may gain too much speed on downgrades.
Stopping distance increases. Brakes can fail when
forced to work too hard.

During bad weather or in mountains, it may not be
safe to operate at legal maximum weights. Take
this into account before driving.

3.2.3 ­ Don't Be Top-heavy                                                               Figure 3.1

The height of the vehicle's center of gravity is very         3.3.2 ­ Cargo Tie-down
important for safe handling. A high center of gravity
(cargo piled up high or heavy cargo on top) means             On flatbed trailers or trailers without sides, cargo
you are more likely to tip over. It is most dangerous         must be secured to keep it from shifting or falling
in curves, or if you have to swerve to avoid a                off. In closed vans, tie-downs can also be
hazard. It is very important to distribute the cargo          important to prevent cargo shifting that may affect
so it is as low as possible. Put the heaviest parts of        the handling of the vehicle. Tie-downs must be of
the cargo under the lightest parts.                           the proper type and proper strength. Federal
                                                              regulations require the aggregate working load limit
3.2.4 ­ Balance the Weight                                    of any securement system used to secure an
                                                              article or group of articles against movement must
Poor weight balance can make vehicle handling                 be at least one-half times the weight of the article
unsafe. Too much weight on the steering axle can              or group of articles. Proper tie-down equipment
cause hard steering. It can damage the steering               must be used, including ropes, straps, chains, and
axle and tires. Under-loaded front axles (caused by           tensioning devices (winches, ratchets, clinching
shifting weight too far to the rear) can make the             components). Tie-downs must be attached to the
steering axle weight too light to steer safely. Too           vehicle correctly (hooks, bolts, rails, rings). See
little weight on the driving axles can cause poor             figure 3.2.
traction. The drive wheels may spin easily. During
bad weather, the truck may not be able to keep
going. Weight that is loaded so there is a high
center of gravity causes greater chance of rollover.
On flat bed vehicles, there is also a greater chance
that the load will shift to the side or fall off. See
Figure 3.1.

3.3 ­ Securing Cargo

3.3.1 ­ Blocking and Bracing

Blocking is used in the front, back, and/or sides of
a piece of cargo to keep it from sliding. Blocking is
shaped to fit snugly against cargo. It is secured to
the cargo deck to prevent cargo movement.
Bracing is also used to prevent movement of
cargo. Bracing goes from the upper part of the
cargo to the floor and/or walls of the cargo
compartment.

                                                              Figure 3.2

Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely                                     Page 3-2
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Cargo should have at least one tie-down for each              3.4.2 ­ Hanging Meat
ten feet of cargo. Make sure you have enough tie-
downs to meet this need. No matter how small the              Hanging meat (suspended beef, pork, lamb) in a
cargo, it should have at least two tie-downs.                 refrigerated truck can be a very unstable load with
                                                              a high center of gravity. Particular caution is
There are special requirements for securing                   needed on sharp curves such as off ramps and on
various heavy pieces of metal. Find out what they             ramps. Go slowly.
are if you are to carry such loads.
                                                              3.4.3 ­ Livestock
3.3.3 ­ Header Boards
                                                              Livestock can move around in a trailer, causing
Front-end header boards ("headache racks")                    unsafe handling. With less than a full load, use
protect you from your cargo in case of a crash or             false bulkheads to keep livestock bunched
emergency stop. Make sure the front-end structure             together. Even when bunched, special care is
is in good condition. The front-end structure should          necessary because livestock can lean on curves.
block the forward movement of any cargo you                   This shifts the center of gravity and makes rollover
carry.                                                        more likely.

3.3.4 ­ Covering Cargo                                        3.4.4 ­ Oversized Loads

There are two basic reasons for covering cargo:               Over-length, over-width, and/or overweight loads
                                                              require special transit permits. Driving is usually
To protect people from spilled cargo.                         limited to certain times. Special equipment may be
                                                              necessary such as "wide load" signs, flashing
To protect the cargo from weather.                            lights, flags, etc. Such loads may require a police
                                                              escort or pilot vehicles bearing warning signs
Spill protection is a safety requirement in many              and/or flashing lights. These special loads require
states. Be familiar with the laws in the states you           special driving care.
drive in.

You should look at your cargo covers in the mirrors                                Section 3
from time to time while driving. A flapping cover                          Test Your Knowledge
can tear loose, uncovering the cargo, and possibly
block your view or someone else's.                            1. What four things related to cargo are drivers
                                                                   responsible for?
3.3.5 ­ Sealed and Containerized Loads
                                                              2. How often must you stop while on the road to
Containerized loads generally are used when                        check your cargo?
freight is carried part way by rail or ship. Delivery
by truck occurs at the beginning and/or end of the            3. How is Gross Combination Weight Rating
journey. Some containers have their own tiedown                    different from Gross Combination Weight?
devices or locks that attach directly to a special
frame. Others have to be loaded onto flatbed                  4. Name two situations where legal maximum
trailers. They must be properly secured just like                  weights may not be safe.
any other cargo.
                                                              5. What can happen if you don't have enough
You cannot inspect sealed loads, but you should                    weight on the front axle?
check that you don't exceed gross weight and axle
weight limits.                                                6. What is the minimum number of tie-downs for
                                                                   any flatbed load?
3.4 ­ Cargo Needing Special Attention
                                                              7. What is the minimum number of tie-downs for
3.4.1 ­ Dry Bulk                                                   a 20-foot load?

Dry bulk tanks require special care because they              8. Name the two basic reasons for covering
have a high center of gravity, and the load can                    cargo on an open bed.
shift. Be extremely cautious (slow and careful)
going around curves and making sharp turns.                   9. What must you check before transporting a
                                                                   sealed load?

                                                              These questions may be on your test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read Section 3.

Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely                         Page 3-3
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                     THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.

Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely                         Page 3-2
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 4                                          Wheels and rims.
      TRANSPORTING
  PASSENGERS SAFELY                                           Emergency equipment.

This Section Covers                                           4.1.2 ­ Access Doors and Panels

 Vehicle Inspection                                           As you check the outside of the bus, close any
 Loading                                                      open emergency exits. Also, close any open
 On the Road                                                  access panels (for baggage, restroom service,
 After-trip Vehicle Inspection                                engine, etc.) before driving.
 Prohibited Practices
 Use of Brake-door Interlocks                                 4.1.3 ­ Bus Interior

Bus drivers must have a commercial driver license             People sometimes damage unattended buses.
if they drive a vehicle designed to seat more than            Always check the interior of the bus before driving
16 or more persons, including the driver.                     to ensure rider safety. Aisles and stairwells should
                                                              always be clear. The following parts of your bus
Bus drivers must have a passenger endorsement                 must be in safe working condition:
on their commercial driver license. To get the
endorsement you must pass a knowledge test on                 Each handhold and railing.
Sections 2 and 4 of this manual. (If your bus has
air brakes, you must also pass a knowledge test on            Floor covering.
Section 5.) You must also pass the skills tests
required for the class of vehicle you drive.                  Signaling devices, including the restroom
                                                              emergency buzzer, if the bus has a restroom.
4.1 ­ Vehicle Inspection
                                                              Emergency exit handles.
Before driving your bus, you must be sure it is
safe. You must review the inspection report made               The seats must be safe for riders. All seats must
by the previous driver. Only if defects reported               be securely fastened to the bus.
earlier have been certified as repaired or not
needed to be repaired, should you sign the                    Never drive with an open emergency exit door or
previous driver's report. This is your certification          window. The "Emergency Exit" sign on an
that the defects reported earlier have been fixed.            emergency door must be clearly visible. If there is
                                                              a red emergency door light, it must work. Turn it on
4.1.1 ­ Vehicle Systems                                       at night or any other time you use your outside
                                                              lights.
Make sure these things are in good working order
before driving:                                               4.1.4 ­ Roof Hatches

Service brakes, including air hose couplings (if              You may lock some emergency roof hatches in a
your bus has a trailer or semitrailer).                       partly open position for fresh air. Do not leave them
                                                              open as a regular practice. Keep in mind the bus's
Parking brake.                                                higher clearance while driving with them open.

Steering mechanism.                                           Make sure your bus has the fire extinguisher and
                                                              emergency reflectors required by law. The bus
Lights and reflectors.                                        must also have spare electrical fuses, unless
                                                              equipped with circuit breakers.
Tires (front wheels must not have recapped or re-
grooved tires).                                               4.1.5 ­ Use Your Seatbelt!

Horn.                                                         The driver's seat should have a seat belt. Always
                                                              use it for safety.
Windshield wiper or wipers.
                                                              4.2 ­ Loading and Trip Start
Rear-vision mirror or mirrors.
                                                              Do not allow riders to leave carry-on baggage in a
Coupling devices (if present).                                doorway or aisle. There should be nothing in the
                                                              aisle that might trip other riders. Secure baggage
                                                              and freight in ways that avoid damage and:

                                                              Allow the driver to move freely and easily.

Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely                    Page 4-1
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Allow riders to exit by any window or door in an              Division 2.3 poison gas, liquid Class 6 poison, tear
emergency.                                                    gas, irritating material.

Protect riders from injury if carry-ons fall or shift.        More than 100 pounds of solid Class 6 poisons.

4.2.1 ­ Hazardous Materials                                   Explosives in the space occupied by people,
                                                              except small arms ammunition.
Watch for cargo or baggage containing hazardous
materials. Most hazardous materials cannot be                 Labeled radioactive materials in the space
carried on a bus.                                             occupied by people.

The Federal Hazardous Materials Table shows                   More than 500 pounds total of allowed hazardous
which materials are hazardous. They pose a risk to            materials, and no more than 100 pounds of any
health, safety, and property during transportation.           one class.
The rules require shippers to mark containers of
hazardous material with the material's name,                  Riders sometimes board a bus with an unlabeled
identification number, and hazard label. There are            hazardous material. Do not allow riders to carry on
nine different four-inch, diamond-shaped hazard               common hazards such as car batteries or gasoline.
labels. See Figure 4.1. Watch for the diamond-
shaped labels. Do not transport any hazardous                 4.2.3 ­ Standee Line
material unless you are sure the rules allow it.
                                                              No rider may stand forward of the rear of the
       Hazard Class Definitions                               driver's seat. Buses designed to allow standing
                                                              must have a two-inch line on the floor or some
Class  Class Name     Example                                 other means of showing riders where they cannot
1                                                             stand. This is called the standee line. All standing
2                     Ammunition,                             riders must stay behind it.
3
4      Explosives     Dynamite,                               4.2.4 ­ At Your Destination
5
6                     Fireworks                               When arriving at the destination or intermediate
7                                                             stops announce:
8      Gases          Propane, Oxygen,
9                     Helium                                  The location.

None   Flammable      Gasoline Fuel,                          Reason for stopping.
                      Acetone
None                                                          Next departure time.
       Flammable      Matches, Fuses
       Solids                                                 Bus number.

                      Ammonium                                Remind riders to take carry-ons with them if they
                                                              get off the bus. If the aisle is on a lower level than
       Oxidizers      Nitrate, Hydrogen                       the seats, remind riders of the step-down. It is best
                                                              to tell them before coming to a complete stop.
                      Peroxide
                                                              Charter bus drivers should not allow riders on the
       Poisons        Pesticides,                             bus until departure time. This will help prevent theft
                      Arsenic                                 or vandalism of the bus.

       Radioactive    Uranium,                                4.3 ­ On the Road
                      Plutonium
                                                              4.3.1 ­ Passenger Supervision
       Corrosives     Hydrochloric Acid,
                      Battery Acid                            Many charter and intercity carriers have passenger
                                                              comfort and safety rules. Mention rules about
       Miscellaneous  Formaldehyde,                           smoking, drinking, or use of radio and tape players
       Hazardous      Asbestos                                at the start of the trip. Explaining the rules at the
       Materials                                              start will help to avoid trouble later on.

       ORM-D (Other                                           While driving, scan the interior of your bus as well
                                                              as the road ahead, to the sides, and to the rear.
       Regulated      Hair Spray or

       Material-      Charcoal

       Domestic)

       Combustible    Fuel Oils, Lighter

       Liquids        Fluid

                  Figure 4.1

4.2.2 ­ Forbidden Hazardous Materials

Buses may carry small-arms ammunition labeled
ORM-D, emergency hospital supplies, and drugs.
You can carry small amounts of some other
hazardous materials if the shipper cannot send
them any other way. Buses must never carry:

Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely                    Page 4-2
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

You may have to remind riders about rules, or to              If your bus has a manual transmission, never
keep arms and heads inside the bus.                           change gears while crossing the tracks.

4.3.2 ­ At Stops                                              You do not have to stop, but must slow down and
                                                              carefully check for other vehicles:
Riders can stumble when getting on or off, and
when the bus starts or stops. Caution riders to               At streetcar crossings.
watch their step when leaving the bus. Wait for
them to sit down or brace themselves before                   Where a policeman or flagman is directing traffic.
starting. Starting and stopping should be as
smooth as possible to avoid rider injury.                     If a traffic signal is green.

                                                              At crossings marked as "exempt" or "abandoned."

Occasionally, you may have a drunk or disruptive              4.3.6 ­ Drawbridges
rider. You must ensure this rider's safety as well as
that of others. Don't discharge such riders where it          Stop at Drawbridges. Stop at drawbridges that do
would be unsafe for them. It may be safer at the              not have a signal light or traffic control attendant.
next scheduled stop or a well-lighted area where              Stop at least 50 feet before the draw of the bridge.
there are other people. Many carriers have                    Look to make sure the draw is completely closed
guidelines for handling disruptive riders.                    before crossing. You do not need to stop, but must
                                                              slow down and make sure it's safe, when:
4.3.3 ­ Common Accidents
                                                              There is a traffic light showing green.
The Most Common Bus Accidents. Bus
accidents often happen at intersections. Use                  The bridge has an attendant or traffic officer who
caution, even if a signal or stop sign controls other         controls traffic whenever the bridge opens.
traffic. School and mass transit buses sometimes
scrape off mirrors or hit passing vehicles when               4.4 ­ After-trip Vehicle Inspection
pulling out from a bus stop. Remember the
clearance your bus needs, and watch for poles and             Inspect your bus at the end of each shift. If you
tree limbs at stops. Know the size of the gap your            work for an interstate carrier, you must complete a
bus needs to accelerate and merge with traffic.               written inspection report for each bus driven. The
Wait for the gap to open before leaving the stop.             report must specify each bus and list any defect
Never assume other drivers will brake to give you             that would affect safety or result in a breakdown. If
room when you signal or start to pull out.                    there are no defects, the report should say so.

4.3.4 ­ Speed on Curves                                       Riders sometimes damage safety-related parts
                                                              such as handholds, seats, emergency exits, and
Crashes on curves that kill people and destroy                windows. If you report this damage at the end of a
buses result from excessive speed, often when                 shift, mechanics can make repairs before the bus
rain or snow has made the road slippery. Every                goes out again. Mass transit drivers should also
banked curve has a safe "design speed." In good               make sure passenger signaling devices and brake-
weather, the posted speed is safe for cars but it             door interlocks work properly.
may be too high for many buses. With good
traction, the bus may roll over; with poor traction, it       4.5 ­ Prohibited Practices
might slide off the curve. Reduce speed for curves!
If your bus leans toward the outside on a banked              Avoid fueling your bus with riders on board unless
curve, you are driving too fast.                              absolutely necessary. Never refuel in a closed
                                                              building with riders on board.
4.3.5 ­ Railroad-highway Crossing/ Stops
                                                              Don't talk with riders, or engage in any other
Stop at RR Crossings:                                         distracting activity, while driving.

Stop your bus between 15 and 50 feet before                   Do not tow or push a disabled bus with riders
railroad crossings.                                           aboard the vehicle, unless getting off would be
                                                              unsafe. Only tow or push the bus to the nearest
Listen and look in both directions for trains. You            safe spot to discharge passengers. Follow your
should open your forward door if it improves your             employer's guidelines on towing or pushing
ability to see or hear an approaching train.                  disabled buses.

Before crossing after a train has passed, make
sure there isn't another train coming in the other
direction on other tracks.

Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely                    Page 4-3
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

4.6 ­ Use of Brake-door Interlocks

Urban mass transit coaches may have a brake and
accelerator interlock system. The interlock applies
the brakes and holds the throttle in idle position
when the rear door is open. The interlock releases
when you close the rear door. Do not use this
safety feature in place of the parking brake.

                     Section 4
             Test Your Knowledge

1. Name some things to check in the interior of a
     bus during a Vehicle inspection.

2. What are some hazardous materials you can
     transport by bus?

3. What are some hazardous materials you can't
     transport by bus?

4. What is a standee line?
5. Does it matter where you make a disruptive

     passenger get off the bus?
6. How far from a railroad crossing should you

     stop?
7. When must you stop before crossing a

     drawbridge?
8. Describe from memory the "prohibited

     practices" listed in the manual.
9. The rear door of a transit bus has to be open

     to put on the parking brake. True or False?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read Section 4.

Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely                    Page 4-4
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 5                                          5.1.2 ­ Air Compressor Governor
         AIR BRAKES
                                                              The governor controls when the air compressor will
This Section Covers                                           pump air into the air storage tanks. When air tank
                                                              pressure rises to the "cut-out" level (around 125
 Air Brake System Parts                                       pounds per-square-inch or "psi"), the governor
 Dual Air Brake Systems                                       stops the compressor from pumping air. When the
 Inspecting Air Brakes                                        tank pressure falls to the "cut-in" pressure (around
 Using Air Brakes                                             100 psi), the governor allows the compressor to
                                                              start pumping again.
This section tells you about air brakes. If you want
to drive a truck or bus with air brakes, or pull a            5.1.3 ­ Air Storage Tanks
trailer with air brakes, you need to read this
section. If you want to pull a trailer with air brakes,       Air storage tanks are used to hold compressed air.
you also need to read Section 6, Combination                  The number and size of air tanks varies among
Vehicles.                                                     vehicles. The tanks will hold enough air to allow
                                                              the brakes to be used several times, even if the
Air brakes use compressed air to make the brakes              compressor stops working.
work. Air brakes are a good and safe way of
stopping large and heavy vehicles, but the brakes             5.1.4 ­ Air Tank Drains
must be well maintained and used properly.
                                                              Compressed air usually has some water and some
Air brakes are really three different braking                 compressor oil in it, which is bad for the air brake
systems: service brake, parking brake, and                    system. For example, the water can freeze in cold
emergency brake.                                              weather and cause brake failure. The water and oil
                                                              tend to collect in the bottom of the air tank. Be sure
The service brake system applies and releases the             that you drain the air tanks completely. Each air
brakes when you use the brake pedal during                    tank is equipped with a drain valve in the bottom.
normal driving.                                               There are two types:

The parking brake system applies and releases the             Manually operated by turning a quarter turn or by
parking brakes when you use the parking brake                 pulling a cable. You must drain the tanks yourself
control.                                                      at the end of each day of driving. See Figure 5.1.

The emergency brake system uses parts of the                  Automatic--the water and oil are automatically
service and parking brake systems to stop the                 expelled. These tanks may be equipped for
vehicle in a brake system failure.                            manual draining as well.

                                                              Automatic air tanks are available with electric
                                                              heating devices. These help prevent freezing of
                                                              the automatic drain in cold weather.

The parts of these systems are discussed in
greater detail below.

5.1 ­ The Parts of an Air Brake System

There are many parts to an air brake system. You
should know about the parts discussed here.

5.1.1 ­ Air Compressor                                        Figure 5.1

The air compressor pumps air into the air storage
tanks (reservoirs). The air compressor is
connected to the engine through gears or a v-belt.
The compressor may be air cooled or may be
cooled by the engine cooling system. It may have
its own oil supply or be lubricated by engine oil. If
the compressor has its own oil supply, check the
oil level before driving.

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes                                                    Page 5-1
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

5.1.5 ­ Alcohol Evaporator                                    another and presses them against the inside of the

Some air brake systems have an alcohol                        brake  drum.
evaporator to put alcohol into the air system. This
helps to reduce the risk of ice in air brake valves
and other parts during cold weather. Ice inside the
system can make the brakes stop working.

Check the alcohol container and fill up as
necessary, every day during cold weather. Daily air
tank drainage is still needed to get rid of water and
oil. (Unless the system has automatic drain
valves.)

5.1.6 ­ Safety Valve

A safety relief valve is installed in the first tank the
air compressor pumps air to. The safety valve
protects the tank and the rest of the system from
too much pressure. The valve is usually set to
open at 150 psi. If the safety valve releases air,
something is wrong. Have the fault fixed by a
mechanic.

5.1.7 ­ The Brake Pedal

You put on the brakes by pushing down the brake
pedal. (It is also called the foot valve or treadle
valve.) Pushing the pedal down harder applies
more air pressure. Letting up on the brake pedal
reduces the air pressure and releases the brakes.
Releasing the brakes lets some compressed air go
out of the system, so the air pressure in the tanks
is reduced. It must be made up by the air
compressor. Pressing and releasing the pedal
unnecessarily can let air out faster than the
compressor can replace it. If the pressure gets too
low, the brakes won't work.

5.1.8 ­ Foundation Brakes

Foundation brakes are used at each wheel. The
most common type is the s-cam drum brake. The
parts of the brake are discussed below.

Brake Drums, Shoes, and Linings. Brake drums
are located on each end of the vehicle's axles. The
wheels are bolted to the drums. The braking
mechanism is inside the drum. To stop, the brake
shoes and linings are pushed against the inside of
the drum. This causes friction, which slows the
vehicle (and creates heat). The heat a drum can
take without damage depends on how hard and
how long the brakes are used. Too much heat can
make the brakes stop working.

S-cam Brakes. When you push the brake pedal,                         Page 5-2
air is let into each brake chamber. Air pressure
pushes the rod out, moving the slack adjuster, thus
twisting the brake camshaft. This turns the s-cam
(so called because it is shaped like the letter "S").
The s-cam forces the brake shoes away from one

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

When you release the brake pedal, the s-cam                   vehicles.) Increasing application pressure to hold
rotates back and a spring pulls the brake shoes               the same speed means the brakes are fading. You
away from the drum, letting the wheels roll freely            should slow down and use a lower gear. The need
again. See Figure 5.2.                                        for increased pressure can also be caused by
                                                              brakes out of adjustment, air leaks, or mechanical
                                                              problems.

                                                              5.1.11 ­ Low Air Pressure Warning

                                                              A low air pressure warning signal is required on
                                                              vehicles with air brakes. A warning signal you can
                                                              see must come on before the air pressure in the
                                                              tanks falls below 60 psi. (Or one half the
                                                              compressor governor cutout pressure on older
                                                              vehicles.) The warning is usually a red light. A
                                                              buzzer may also come on.

                           Figure 5.2                         Another type of warning is the "wig wag." This
                                                              device drops a mechanical arm into your view
Wedge Brakes. In this type of brake, the brake                when the pressure in the system drops below 60
chamber push rod pushes a wedge directly                      psi. An automatic wig wag will rise out of your view
between the ends of two brake shoes. This shoves              when the pressure in the system goes above 60
them apart and against the inside of the brake                psi. The manual reset type must be placed in the
drum. Wedge brakes may have a single brake                    "out of view" position manually. It will not stay in
chamber, or two brake chambers, pushing wedges                place until the pressure in the system is above 60
in at both ends of the brake shoes. Wedge type                psi.
brakes may be self-adjusting or may require
manual adjustment.                                            On large buses it is common for the low pressure
                                                              warning devices to signal at 80-85 psi.
Disc Brakes. In air-operated disc brakes, air
pressure acts on a brake chamber and slack                    5.1.12 ­ Stop Light Switch
adjuster, like s-cam brakes. But instead of the s-
cam, a "power screw" is used. The pressure of the             Drivers behind you must be warned when you put
brake chamber on the slack adjuster turns the                 your brakes on. The air brake system does this
power screw. The power screw clamps the disc or               with an electric switch that works by air pressure.
rotor between the brake lining pads of a caliper,             The switch turns on the brake lights when you put
similar to a large c-clamp.                                   on the air brakes.

Wedge brakes and disc brakes are less common                  5.1.13 ­ Front Brake Limiting Valve
than s-cam brakes.
                                                              Some older vehicles (made before 1975) have a
5.1.9 ­ Supply Pressure Gauges                                front brake limiting valve and a control in the cab.
                                                              The control is usually marked "normal" and
All vehicles with air brakes have a pressure gauge            "slippery." When you put the control in the
connected to the air tank. If the vehicle has a dual          "slippery" position, the limiting valve cuts the
air brake system, there will be a gauge for each              "normal" air pressure to the front brakes by half.
half of the system. (Or a single gauge with two               Limiting valves were used to reduce the chance of
needles.) Dual systems will be discussed later.               the front wheels skidding on slippery surfaces.
These gauges tell you how much pressure is in the             However, they actually reduce the stopping power
air tanks.                                                    of the vehicle. Front wheel braking is good under
                                                              all conditions. Tests have shown front wheel skids
5.1.10 ­ Application Pressure Gauge                           from braking are not likely even on ice. Make sure
                                                              the control is in the "normal" position to have
This gauge shows how much air pressure you are                normal stopping power.
applying to the brakes. (This gauge is not on all
                                                              Many vehicles have automatic front wheel limiting
Section 5 ­ Air Brakes                                        valves. They reduce the air to the front brakes
Version: July 2014                                            except when the brakes are put on very hard (60
                                                              psi or more application pressure). These valves
                                                              cannot be controlled by the driver.

                                                                                                                                     Page 5-3
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

5.1.14 ­ Spring Brakes                                        lever as far as it will go and hold it in place with the
                                                              locking device.
All trucks, truck tractors, and buses must be
equipped with emergency brakes and parking                    Dual Parking Control Valves. When main air
brakes. They must be held on by mechanical force              pressure is lost, the spring brakes come on. Some
(because air pressure can eventually leak away).              vehicles, such as buses, have a separate air tank
Spring brakes are usually used to meet these                  which can be used to release the spring brakes.
needs. When driving, powerful springs are held                This is so you can move the vehicle in an
back by air pressure. If the air pressure is                  emergency. One of the valves is a push-pull type
removed, the springs put on the brakes. A parking             and is used to put on the spring brakes for parking.
brake control in the cab allows the driver to let the         The other valve is spring loaded in the "out"
air out of the spring brakes. This lets the springs           position. When you push the control in, air from the
put the brakes on. A leak in the air brake system,            separate air tank releases the spring brakes so you
which causes all the air to be lost, will also cause          can move. When you release the button, the spring
the springs to put on the brakes.                             brakes come on again. There is only enough air in
                                                              the separate tank to do this a few times. Therefore,
Tractor and straight truck spring brakes will come            plan carefully when moving. Otherwise, you may
fully on when air pressure drops to a range of 20 to          be stopped in a dangerous location when the
45 psi (typically 20 to 30 psi). Do not wait for the          separate air supply runs out. See Figure 5.3.
brakes to come on automatically. When the low air
pressure warning light and buzzer first come on,
bring the vehicle to a safe stop right away, while
you can still control the brakes.

The braking power of spring brakes depends on
the brakes being in adjustment. If the brakes are
not adjusted properly, neither the regular brakes
nor the emergency/parking brakes will work right.

5.1.15 ­ Parking Brake Controls

In newer vehicles with air brakes, you put on the
parking brakes using a diamond-shaped, yellow,
push-pull control knob. You pull the knob out to put
the parking brakes (spring brakes) on, and push it
in to release them. On older vehicles, the parking
brakes may be controlled by a lever. Use the
parking brakes whenever you park.

Caution. Never push the brake pedal down when
the spring brakes are on. If you do, the brakes
could be damaged by the combined forces of the
springs and the air pressure. Many brake systems
are designed so this will not happen. But not all
systems are set up that way, and those that are
may not always work. It is much better to develop
the habit of not pushing the brake pedal down
when the spring brakes are on.

Modulating Control Valves. In some vehicles a

control handle on the dash board may be used to

apply the spring brakes gradually. This is called a

modulating valve. It is spring-loaded so you have a

feel for the braking action. The more you move the                                       Figure 5.3

control lever, the harder the spring brakes come              5.1.16 ­ Antilock Braking Systems (ABS)
                                                              Truck tractors with air brakes built on or after
on. They work this way so you can control the                 March 1, 1997, and other air brakes vehicles,
                                                              (trucks, buses, trailers, and converter dollies) built
spring brakes if the service brakes fail. When                on or after March 1, 1998, are required to be

parking a vehicle with a modulating control valve,                                                                                   Page 5-4

move                    the

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

equipped with antilock brakes. Many commercial                If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes
vehicles built before these dates have been                   on once you are under way, you may have lost
voluntarily equipped with ABS. Check the                      ABS control at one or more wheels.
certification label for the date of manufacture to
determine if your vehicle is equipped with ABS.               In the case of towed units manufactured before it
ABS is a computerized system that keeps your                  was required by the Department of Transportation,
wheels from locking up during hard brake                      it may be difficult to tell if the unit is equipped with
applications.                                                 ABS. Look under the vehicle for the electronic
                                                              control unit (ECU) and wheel speed sensor wires
Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps               coming from the back of the brakes.
to tell you if something isn't working.

Tractors, trucks, and buses will have yellow ABS              ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does
malfunction lamps on the instrument panel.                    not decrease or increase your normal braking
                                                              capability. ABS only activates when wheels are
Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on            about to lock up.
the left side, either on the front or rear corner.
Dollies manufactured on or after March 1, 1998 are            ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping
required to have a lamp on the left side.                     distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle
                                                              under control during hard braking
On newer vehicles, the malfunction lamp comes on
at start-up for a bulb check, and then goes out
quickly. On older systems, the lamp could stay on
until you are driving over five mph.

                                    Figure 5.4                    All vehicles with air brakes must have a
                                                3.                low air pressure warning signal. True or
                                                                  False?
    .Subsection 5.1                                           4.  What are spring brakes?

    Test Your Knowledge                                           Front wheel brakes are good under all
                                                                  conditions. True or False?
1.  Why must air tanks be drained?                            5.
                                                                                                                            Page 5-5
2.  What is a supply pressure gauge used for?

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

6.      How do you know if your vehicle is

        equipped with antilock brakes?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't             (and possibly one rear axle). Both systems supply
answer them all, re-read subsection 5.1.                      air to the trailer (if there is one). The first system is
                                                              called the "primary" system. The other is called the
                                                              "secondary" system. See Figure 5.4.

5.2 ­ Dual Air Brake                                          Before driving a vehicle with a dual air system,
                                                              allow time for the air compressor to build up a
Most heavy-duty vehicles use dual air brake                   minimum of 100 psi pressure in both the primary
                                                              and secondary systems. Watch the primary and
systems for safety. A dual air brake system has               secondary air pressure gauges (or needles, if the
                                                              system has two needles in one gauge). Pay
two separate air brake systems, which use a single            attention to the low air pressure warning light and
                                                              buzzer. The warning light and buzzer should shut
set of brake controls. Each system has its own air            off when air pressure in both systems rises to a
                                                              value set by the manufacturer. This value must be
tanks, hoses, lines, etc. One system typically                greater than 60 psi.

operates the regular brakes on the rear axle or

axles. The other system operates the regular

brakes  on              the  front      axle

                                                              The warning light and buzzer should come on
                                                              before the air pressure drops below 60 psi in either
                                                              system. If this happens while driving, you should
                                                              stop right away and safely park the vehicle. If one
                                                              air system is very low on pressure, either the front
                                                              or the rear brakes will not be operating fully. This
                                                              means it will take you longer to stop. Bring the
                                                              vehicle to a safe stop, and have the air brakes
                                                              system fixed.

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes                                        Page 5-6
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

5.3 ­ Inspecting Air Brake Systems                            to have the problem corrected. The manual
                                                              adjustment of automatic slack adjusters is
You should use the basic seven-step inspection                dangerous because it may give the driver a false
procedure described in Section 2 to inspect your              sense of security regarding the effectiveness of the
vehicle. There are more things to inspect on a                braking system.
vehicle with air brakes than one without them.
These things are discussed below, in the order                The manual adjustment of an automatic adjuster
they fit into the seven-step method.                          should only be used as a temporary measure to
                                                              correct the adjustment in an emergency situation
5.3.1 ­ During Step 2 Engine Compartment                      as it is likely the brake will soon be back out of
Checks                                                        adjustment since this procedure usually does not
                                                              fix the underlying adjustment problem.
Check Air Compressor Drive Belt (if compressor is             (Note: Automatic slack adjusters are made by
belt-driven). If the air compressor is belt-driven,           different manufacturers and do not all operate the
check the condition and tightness of the belt. It             same. Therefore, the specific manufacturer's
should be in good condition.                                  Service Manual should be consulted prior to
                                                              troubleshooting a brake adjustment problem.)
5.3.2 ­ During Step 5 Walk-around Inspection
                                                              Check Brake Drums (or Discs), Linings, and
Check Slack Adjusters on S-cam Brakes. Park on                Hoses. Brake drums (or discs) must not have
level ground and chock the wheels to prevent the              cracks longer than one half the width of the friction
vehicle from moving. Release the parking brakes               area. Linings (friction material) must not be loose
so you can move the slack adjusters. Use gloves               or soaked with oil or grease. They must not be
and pull hard on each slack adjuster that you can             dangerously thin. Mechanical parts must be in
reach. If a slack adjuster moves more than about              place, not broken or missing. Check the air hoses
one inch where the push rod attaches to it, it                connected to the brake chambers to make sure
probably needs adjustment. Adjust it or have it               they aren't cut or worn due to rubbing.
adjusted. Vehicles with too much brake slack can
be very hard to stop. Out-of-adjustment brakes are            5.3.3 ­ Step 7 Final Air Brake Check
the most common problem found in roadside
inspections. Be safe. Check the slack adjusters.              Do the following checks instead of the hydraulic
                                                              brake check shown in Section 2, Step 7: Check
All vehicles built since 1994 have automatic slack            Brake System.
adjustors. Even though automatic slack adjustors
adjust themselves during full brake applications,             Test Low Pressure Warning Signal. Shut the
they must be checked.                                         engine off when you have enough air pressure so
                                                              that the low pressure warning signal is not on. Turn
Automatic adjusters should not have to be                     the electrical power on and step on and off the
manually adjusted except when performing                      brake pedal to reduce air tank pressure. The low
maintenance on the brakes and during installation             air pressure warning signal must come on before
of the slack adjusters. In a vehicle equipped with            the pressure drops to less than 60 psi in the air
automatic adjusters, when the pushrod stroke                  tank (or tank with the lowest air pressure, in dual
exceeds the legal brake adjustment limit, it is an            air systems). See Figure 5.5.
indication that a mechanical problem exists in the
adjuster itself, a problem with the related                   If the warning signal doesn't work, you could lose
foundation brake components, or that the adjuster             air pressure and you would not know it. This could
was improperly installed.                                     cause sudden emergency braking in a single-
                                                              circuit air system. In dual systems the stopping
The manual adjustment of an automatic adjuster to             distance will be increased. Only limited braking can
bring a brake pushrod stroke within legal limits is           be done before the spring brakes come on.
generally masking a mechanical problem and is
not fixing it. Further, routine adjustment of most
automatic adjusters will likely result in premature
wear of the adjuster itself. It is recommended that
when brakes equipped with automatic adjusters
are found to be out of adjustment, the driver take
the vehicle to a repair facility as soon as possible

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes                                        Page 5-7
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                           Figure 5.5                         With the air pressure built up to governor cutoff
                                                              (120 ­ 140 psi), shut off the engine, chock your
Check That Spring Brakes Come On                              wheels (if necessary), release the parking brake
Automatically. Continue to fan off the air                    (all vehicles), and the tractor protection valve
pressure by stepping on and off the brake pedal to            (combination vehicle); and fully apply the foot
reduce tank pressure. The tractor protection valve            brake. Hold the foot brake for one minute. Check
and parking brake valve should close (pop out) on             the air gauge to see if the air pressure drops more
a tractor-trailer combination vehicle and the                 than three pounds in one minute (single vehicle) or
parking brake valve should close (pop out) on                 four pounds in one minute (combination vehicle). If
other combination and single vehicle types when               the air pressure falls more than three psi in one
the air pressure falls to the manufacturer's                  minute for single vehicles (more than four psi for
specification (20 ­ 45 psi). This will cause the              combination vehicles), the air loss rate is too much.
spring brakes to come on.                                     Check for air leaks and fix before driving the
                                                              vehicle. Otherwise, you could lose your brakes
Check Rate of Air Pressure Buildup. When the                  while driving.
engine is at operating rpms, the pressure should
build from 85 to 100 psi within 45 seconds in dual            Check Air Compressor Governor Cut-in and
air systems. (If the vehicle has larger than                  Cut-out Pressures. Pumping by the air
minimum air tanks, the buildup time can be longer             compressor should start at about 100 psi and stop
and still be safe. Check the manufacturer's                   at about 125 psi. (Check manufacturer's
specifications.) In single air systems (pre-1975),            specifications.) Run the engine at a fast idle. The
typical requirements are pressure build-up from 50            air governor should cut-out the air compressor at
to 90 psi within 3 minutes with the engine at an idle         about the manufacturer's specified pressure. The
speed of 600-900 rpms.                                        air pressure shown by your gauge(s) will stop
                                                              rising. With the engine idling, step on and off the
If air pressure does not build up fast enough, your           brake to reduce the air tank pressure. The
pressure may drop too low during driving, requiring           compressor should cut-in at about the
an emergency stop. Don't drive until you get the              manufacturer's specified cut-in pressure. The
problem fixed.                                                pressure should begin to rise.

Test Air Leakage Rate. With a fully-charged air               If the air governor does not work as described
system (typically 125 psi), turn off the engine,              above, it may need to be fixed. A governor that
release the parking brake (push in); and time the             does not work properly may not keep enough air
air pressure drop. The loss rate should be less               pressure for safe driving.
than two psi in one minute for single vehicles and
less than three psi in one minute for combination             Test Parking Brake. Stop the vehicle, put the
vehicles.                                                     parking brake on, and gently pull against it in a low
                                                              gear to test that the parking brake will hold.
Section 5 ­ Air Brakes
Version: July 2014                                            Test Service Brakes. Wait for normal air pressure,
                                                              release the parking brake, move the vehicle
                                                              forward slowly (about five mph), and apply the
                                                              brakes firmly using the brake pedal. Note any
                                                              vehicle "pulling" to one side, unusual feel, or
                                                              delayed stopping action.

                                                              This test may show you problems, which you
                                                              otherwise wouldn't know about until you needed
                                                              the brakes on the road.

                                                                         Subsections 5.2 and 5.3
                                                                           Test Your Knowledge

                                                              1. What is a dual air brake system?
                                                              2. What are the slack adjusters?
                                                              3. How can you check slack adjusters?
                                                              4. How can you test the low pressure warning

                                                                   signal?

                                                                                                                                     Page 5-8
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

5. How can you check that the spring brakes                   As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer
     come on automatically?                                   and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to
                                                              stay in control.
6. What are the maximum leakage rates?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't             There is only one exception to this procedure, if
answer them all, re-read subsections 5.2 and 5.3.             you always drive a straight truck or combination
                                                              with working ABS on all axles, in an emergency
5.4 ­ Using Air Brakes                                        stop, you can fully apply the brakes.

5.4.1 ­ Normal Stops                                          Without ABS, you still have normal brake functions.
                                                              Drive and brake as you always have.
Push the brake pedal down. Control the pressure
so the vehicle comes to a smooth, safe stop. If you           Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still
have a manual transmission, don't push the clutch             have regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the
in until the engine rpm is down close to idle. When           system serviced soon.
stopped, select a starting gear.
                                                              5.4.3 ­ Emergency Stops
5.4.2 ­ Braking with Antilock Brakes
                                                              If somebody suddenly pulls out in front of you, your
When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a                 natural response is to hit the brakes. This is a good
vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up.                 response if there's enough distance to stop, and
When your steering wheels lock up, you lose                   you use the brakes correctly.
steering control. When your other wheels lock up,             You should brake in a way that will keep your
you may skid, jackknife, or even spin the vehicle.            vehicle in a straight line and allow you to turn if it
                                                              becomes necessary. You can use the "controlled
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up. The computer               braking" method or the "stab braking" method.
senses impending lockup, reduces the braking
pressure to a safe level, and you maintain control.           Controlled Braking. With this method, you apply
You may or may not be able to stop faster with                the brakes as hard as you can without locking the
ABS, but you should be able to steer around an                wheels. Keep steering wheel movements very
obstacle while braking, and avoid skids caused by             small while doing this. If you need to make a larger
over braking.                                                 steering adjustment or if the wheels lock, release
                                                              the brakes. Re-apply the brakes as soon as you
Having ABS on only the tractor, only the trailer, or          can.
even on only one axle, still gives you more control
over the vehicle during braking. Brake normally.              Stab Braking. Apply your brakes all the way.
                                                              Release brakes when wheels lock up. As soon as
When only the tractor has ABS, you should be able             the wheels start rolling, apply the brakes fully
to maintain steering control, and there is less               again. (It can take up to one second for the wheels
chance of jackknifing. But, keep your eye on the              to start rolling after you release the brakes. If you
trailer and let up on the brakes (if you can safely do        re-apply the brakes before the wheels start rolling,
so) if it begins to swing out.                                the vehicle won't straighten out.)

When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less            5.4.4 ­ Stopping Distance
likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control
or start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if        Stopping distance was described in Section 2
you can safely do so) until you gain control.                 under "Speed and Stopping Distance." With air
                                                              brakes there is an added delay - "Brake Lag". This
When you drive a tractor-trailer combination with             is the time required for the brakes to work after the
ABS, you should brake as you always have. In                  brake pedal is pushed. With hydraulic brakes (used
other words:                                                  on cars and light/medium trucks), the brakes work
                                                              instantly. However, with air brakes, it takes a little
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely           time (one half second or more) for the air to flow
and stay in control.                                          through the lines to the brakes. Thus, the total
                                                              stopping distance for vehicles with air brake
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you                 systems is made up of four different factors.
have ABS on the tractor, the trailer, or both.
                                                              Perception Distance + Reaction Distance + Brake
                                                              Lag Distance + Braking Distance = Total Stopping
                                                              Distance.

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes                                        Page 5-9
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

The air brake lag distance at 55 mph on dry                   the proper low gear, the following is the proper
pavement adds about 32 feet. So at 55 mph for an              braking technique:
average driver under good traction and brake
conditions, the total stopping distance is over 450           Apply the brakes just hard enough to feel a definite
feet. See Figure 5.6.                                         slowdown.

                                                              When your speed has been reduced to
                                                              approximately five mph below your "safe" speed,
                                                              release the brakes. (This application should last for
                                                              about three seconds.)

                                                              When your speed has increased to your "safe"
                                                              speed, repeat steps 1 and 2.

                                                              For example, if your "safe" speed is 40 mph, you
                                                              would not apply the brakes until your speed
                                                              reaches 40 mph. You now apply the brakes hard
                                                              enough to gradually reduce your speed to 35 mph
                                                              and then release the brakes. Repeat this as often
                                                              as necessary until you have reached the end of the
                                                              downgrade.

                           Figure 5.6                         5.4.7 ­ Low Air Pressure

5.4.5 ­ Brake Fading or Failure                               If the low air pressure warning comes on, stop and
                                                              safely park your vehicle as soon as possible. There
Brakes are designed so brake shoes or pads rub                might be an air leak in the system. Controlled
against the brake drum or disks to slow the vehicle.          braking is possible only while enough air remains
Braking creates heat, but brakes are designed to              in the air tanks. The spring brakes will come on
take a lot of heat. However, brakes can fade or fail          when the air pressure drops into the range of 20 to
from excessive heat caused by using them too                  45 psi. A heavily loaded vehicle will take a long
much and not relying on the engine braking effect.            distance to stop because the spring brakes do not
                                                              work on all axles. Lightly loaded vehicles or
Excessive use of the service brakes results in                vehicles on slippery roads may skid out of control
overheating and leads to brake fade. Brake fade               when the spring brakes come on. It is much safer
results from excessive heat causing chemical                  to stop while there is enough air in the tanks to use
changes in the brake lining, which reduce friction,           the foot brakes.
and also causing expansion of the brake drums.
As the overheated drums expand, the brake shoes               5.4.8 ­ Parking Brakes
and linings have to move farther to contact the
drums, and the force of this contact is reduced.              Any time you park, use the parking brakes, except
Continued overuse may increase brake fade until               as noted below. Pull the parking brake control
the vehicle cannot be slowed down or stopped.                 knob out to apply the parking brakes, push it in to
Brake fade is also affected by adjustment. To                 release. The control will be a yellow, diamond-
safely control a vehicle, every brake must do its             shaped knob labeled "parking brakes" on newer
share of the work. Brakes out of adjustment will              vehicles. On older vehicles, it may be a round blue
stop doing their share before those that are in               knob or some other shape (including a lever that
adjustment. The other brakes can then overheat                swings from side to side or up and down).
and fade, and there will not be enough braking
available to control the vehicle(s). Brakes can get           Don't use the parking brakes if the brakes are very
out of adjustment quickly, especially when they are           hot (from just having come down a steep grade), or
hot. Therefore, check brake adjustment often.                 if the brakes are very wet in freezing temperatures.
                                                              If they are used while they are very hot, they can
5.4.6 ­ Proper Braking Technique                              be damaged by the heat. If they are used in
                                                              freezing temperatures when the brakes are very
Remember. The use of brakes on a long and/or                  wet, they can freeze so the vehicle cannot move.
steep downgrade is only a supplement to the                   Use wheel chocks on a level surface to hold the
braking effect of the engine. Once the vehicle is in          vehicle. Let hot brakes cool before using the
                                                              parking brakes. If the brakes are wet, use the
Section 5 ­ Air Brakes                                        brakes lightly while driving in a low gear to heat
Version: July 2014                                            and dry them.

                                                                                                                                    Page 5-10
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

If your vehicle does not have automatic air tank              Never leave your vehicle unattended without
drains, drain your air tanks at the end of each               applying the parking brakes or chocking the
working day to remove moisture and oil.                       wheels. Your vehicle might roll away and cause
Otherwise, the brakes could fail.                             injury and damage.

                                                                               Subsection 5.4
                                                                           Test Your Knowledge

                                                              1. Why should you be in the proper gear before
                                                                     starting down a hill?

                                                              2. What factors can cause brakes to fade or
                                                                     fail?

                                                              3. The use of brakes on a long, steep
                                                                     downgrade is only a supplement to the
                                                                     braking effect of the engine. True or False?

                                                              4. If you are away from your vehicle only a short
                                                                     time, you do not need to use the parking
                                                                     brake. True or False?

                                                              5. How often should you drain air tanks?
                                                              6. How should you brake when you drive a

                                                                     tractor-trailer combination with ABS?
                                                              7. You still have normal brake functions if your

                                                                     ABS is not working. True or False?

                                                              These questions may be on your test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read subsection 5.4.

Section 5 ­ Air Brakes                                        Page 5-11
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 6                                          Avoid quick lane changes, especially when fully
COMBINATION VEHICLES                                          loaded.

This Section Covers                                           6.1.2 ­ Steer Gently

 Driving Combinations                                         Trucks with trailers have a dangerous "crack-the-
 Combination Vehicle Air Brakes                               whip" effect. When you make a quick lane change,
 Antilock Brake Systems                                       the crack-the-whip effect can turn the trailer over.
 Coupling and Uncoupling                                      There are many accidents where only the trailer
 Inspecting Combinations                                      has overturned.

This section provides information needed to pass              "Rearward amplification" causes the crack-the-
the tests for combination vehicles (tractor-trailer,          whip effect. Figure 6.1 shows eight types of
doubles, triples, straight truck with trailer). The           combination vehicles and the rearward
information is only to give you the minimum                   amplification each has in a quick lane change.
knowledge needed for driving common                           Rigs with the least crack-the-whip effect are shown
combination vehicles. You should also study                   at the top and those with the most, at the bottom.
Section 7 if you need to pass the test for doubles            Rearward amplification of 2.0 in the chart means
and triples.                                                  that the rear trailer is twice as likely to turn over as
                                                              the tractor. You can see that triples have a
6.1 ­ Driving Combination Vehicles                            rearward amplification of 3.5. This means you can
Safely                                                        roll the last trailer of triples 3.5 times as easily as a
                                                              five-axle tractor.
Combination vehicles are usually heavier, longer,
and require more driving skill than single                    Steer gently and smoothly when you are pulling
commercial vehicles. This means that drivers of               trailers. If you make a sudden movement with your
combination vehicles need more knowledge and                  steering wheel, your trailer could tip over. Follow
skill than drivers of single vehicles. In this section,       far enough behind other vehicles (at least 1
we talk about some important safety factors that              second for each 10 feet of your vehicle length, plus
apply specifically to combination vehicles.                   another second if going over 40 mph). Look far
                                                              enough down the road to avoid being surprised
6.1.1 ­ Rollover Risks                                        and having to make a sudden lane change. At
                                                              night, drive slowly enough to see obstacles with
More than half of truck driver deaths in crashes are          your headlights before it is too late to change lanes
the result of truck rollovers. When more cargo is             or stop gently. Slow down to a safe speed before
piled up in a truck, the "center of gravity" moves            going into a turn.
higher up from the road. The truck becomes easier
to turn over. Fully loaded rigs are ten times more            6.1.3 ­ Brake Early
likely to roll over in a crash than empty rigs.
                                                              Control your speed whether fully loaded or empty.
The following two things will help you prevent                Large combination vehicles take longer to stop
rollover--keep the cargo as close to the ground as            when they are empty than when they are fully
possible, and drive slowly around turns. Keeping              loaded. When lightly loaded, the very stiff
cargo low is even more important in combination               suspension springs and strong brakes give poor
vehicles than in straight trucks. Also, keep the load         traction and make it very easy to lock up the
centered on your rig. If the load is to one side so it        wheels. Your trailer can swing out and strike other
makes a trailer lean, a rollover is more likely. Make         vehicles. Your tractor can jackknife very quickly.
sure your cargo is centered and spread out as                 You also must be very careful about driving
much as possible. (Cargo distribution is covered in           "bobtail" tractors (tractors without semitrailers).
Section 3 of this manual.)                                    Tests have shown that bobtails can be very hard to
                                                              stop smoothly. It takes them longer to stop than a
Rollovers happen when you turn too fast. Drive                tractor-semitrailer loaded to maximum gross
slowly around corners, on ramps, and off ramps.               weight.

                                                              In any combination rig, allow lots of following
                                                              distance and look far ahead, so you can brake
                                                              early. Don't be caught by surprise and have to
                                                              make a "panic" stop.

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-1
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                  Figure 6.1

6.1.4 ­ Railroad-highway Crossings                            6.1.5 ­ Prevent Trailer Skids

Railroad-highway crossings can also cause                     When the wheels of a trailer lock up, the trailer will
problems, particularly when pulling trailers with low         tend to swing around. This is more likely to happen
underneath clearance.                                         when the trailer is empty or lightly loaded. This
                                                              type of jackknife is often called a "trailer jackknife."
These trailers can get stuck on raised crossings:             See Figure 6.2.

Low slung units (lowboy, car carrier, moving van,             The procedure for stopping a trailer skid is:
possum-belly livestock trailer).
                                                              Recognize the Skid. The earliest and best way to
Single-axle tractor pulling a long trailer with its           recognize that the trailer has started to skid is by
landing gear set to accommodate a tandem-axle                 seeing it in your mirrors. Any time you apply the
tractor.                                                      brakes hard, check the mirrors to make sure the
                                                              trailer is staying where it should be. Once the
If for any reason you get stuck on the tracks, get            trailer swings out of your lane, it's very difficult to
out of the vehicle and away from the tracks. Check            prevent a jackknife.
signposts or signal housing at the crossing for
emergency notification information. Call 911 or               * (From R.D. Ervin, R.L. Nisconger, C.C.
other emergency number. Give the location of the              MacAdam, and P.S. Fancher, "Influence of size
crossing using all identifiable landmarks, especially         and weight variables on the stability and control
the DOT number, if posted.                                    properties of heavy trucks, "University of Michigan
                                                              Transportation Research Institute, 1983).

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-2
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                                                               without entering another traffic lane, turn wide as
                                                                               you complete the turn. This is better than swinging
                                                                               wide to the left before starting the turn because it
                                                                               will keep other drivers from passing you on the
                                                                               right. See Figure 6.4.

                                                         Figure 6.3

                   Figure 6.2

Stop Using the Brake. Release the brakes to get
traction back. Do not use the trailer hand brake (if
you have one) to "straighten out the rig." This is the
wrong thing to do since the brakes on the trailer
wheels caused the skid in the first place. Once the
trailer wheels grip the road again, the trailer will
start to follow the tractor and straighten out.

6.1.6 ­ Turn Wide                                                                   Figure 6.4

When a vehicle goes around a corner, the rear            6.1.7 ­ Backing with a Trailer.
                                                         Backing with a Trailer. When backing a car,
wheels follow a different path than the front            straight truck, or bus, you turn the top of the
                                                         steering wheel in the direction you want to go.
wheels. This is called off-tracking or "cheating."       When backing a trailer, you turn the steering wheel
                                                         in the opposite direction. Once the trailer starts to
Figure 6.3 shows how off-tracking causes the path        turn, you must turn the wheel the other way to
                                                         follow the trailer.
followed by a tractor to be wider than the rig itself.
                                                         Whenever you back up with a trailer, try to position
Longer vehicles will off-track more. The rear            your vehicle so you can back in a straight line. If
                                                         you must back on a curved path, back to the
wheels of the powered unit (truck or tractor) will off-  driver's side so you can see. See Figure 6.5.

track some, and the rear wheels of the trailer will                                                                             Page 6-3

off-track even more. If there is more than one

trailer, the rear wheels of the last trailer will off-

track the most. Steer the front end wide enough

around a corner so the rear end does not run over

the curb, pedestrians, etc. However, keep the rear

of your vehicle close to the curb. This will stop

other drivers from passing you on the right. If you

cannot  complete                  your  turn

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                                                      Subsection 6.1
                                                                  Test Your Knowledge

                                                              1.  What two things are important to prevent

                                                                  rollover?

                                                              2.  When you turn suddenly while pulling

                                                                  doubles, which trailer is most likely to turn

                                                                  over?

                                                              3.  Why should you not use the trailer hand

                                                                  brake to straighten out a jackknifing trailer?

                                                              4.  What is off-tracking?

                                                              5.  When you back a trailer, you should

                                                                  position your vehicle so you can back in a

                                                                  curved path to the driver's side. True or

                                                                  False?

                                                              6.  What type of trailers can get stuck on

                                                                  railroad-highway crossings?

                                                              These questions may be on your test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read subsection 6.1.

                           Figure 6.5                         6.2 ­ Combination Vehicle Air Brakes

Look at Your Path. Look at your line of travel                You should study Section 5: Air Brakes before
before you begin. Get out and walk around the                 reading this. In combination vehicles the braking
vehicle. Check your clearance to the sides and                system has parts to control the trailer brakes, in
overhead, in and near the path your vehicle.                  addition to the parts described in Section 5. These
                                                              parts are described below.
Use Mirrors on Both Sides. Check the outside
mirrors on both sides frequently. Get out of the              6.2.1 ­ Trailer Hand Valve
vehicle and re-inspect your path if you are unsure.
                                                              The trailer hand valve (also called the trolley valve
Back Slowly. This will let you make corrections               or Johnson bar) works the trailer brakes. The trailer
before you get too far off course.                            hand valve should be used only to test the trailer
                                                              brakes. Do not use it in driving because of the
Correct Drift Immediately. As soon as you see                 danger of making the trailer skid. The foot brake
the trailer getting off the proper path, correct it by        sends air to all of the brakes on the vehicle
turning the top of the steering wheel in the                  (including the trailer(s)). There is much less danger
direction of the drift.                                       of causing a skid or jackknife when using just the
                                                              foot brake.
Pull Forward. When backing a trailer, make pull-
ups to re-position your vehicle as needed.                    Never use the hand valve for parking because all
                                                              the air might leak out unlocking the brakes (in
                                                              trailers that don't have spring brakes). Always use
                                                              the parking brakes when parking. If the trailer does
                                                              not have spring brakes, use wheel chocks to keep
                                                              the trailer from moving.

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                                                               Page 6-4
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

6.2.2 ­ Tractor Protection Valve                              apart the emergency air hose. Or it could be
                                                              caused by a hose, metal tubing, or other part
The tractor protection valve keeps air in the tractor         breaking, letting the air out. When the emergency
or truck brake system should the trailer break away           line loses pressure, it also causes the tractor
or develop a bad leak. The tractor protection valve           protection valve to close (the air supply knob will
is controlled by the "trailer air supply" control valve       pop out).
in the cab. The control valve allows you to open
and shut the tractor protection valve. The tractor            Emergency lines are often coded with the color red
protection valve will close automatically if air              (red hose, red couplers, or other parts) to keep
pressure is low (in the range of 20 to 45 psi). When          from getting them mixed up with the blue service
the tractor protection valve closes, it stops any air         line.
from going out of the tractor. It also lets the air out
of the trailer emergency line. This causes the trailer        6.2.5 ­ Hose Couplers (Glad Hands)
emergency brakes to come on, with possible loss
of control. (Emergency brakes are covered later.)             Glad hands are coupling devices used to connect
                                                              the service and emergency air-lines from the truck
6.2.3 ­ Trailer Air Supply Control                            or tractor to the trailer. The couplers have a rubber
                                                              seal, which prevents air from escaping. Clean the
The trailer air supply control on newer vehicles is a         couplers and rubber seals before a connection is
red eight-sided knob, which you use to control the            made. When connecting the glad hands, press the
tractor protection valve. You push it in to supply the        two seals together with the couplers at a 90 degree
trailer with air, and pull it out to shut the air off and     angle to each other. A turn of the glad hand
put on the trailer emergency brakes. The valve will           attached to the hose will join and lock the couplers.
pop out (thus closing the tractor protection valve)
when the air pressure drops into the range of 20 to           When coupling, make sure to couple the proper
45 psi. Tractor protection valve controls or                  glad hands together. To help avoid mistakes,
"emergency" valves on older vehicles may not                  colors are sometimes used. Blue is used for the
operate automatically. There may be a lever rather            service lines and red for the emergency (supply)
than a knob. The "normal" position is used for                lines. Sometimes, metal tags are attached to the
pulling a trailer. The "emergency" position is used           lines with the words "service" and "emergency"
to shut the air off and put on the trailer emergency          stamped on them. See Figure 6.6
brakes.

6.2.4 ­ Trailer Air-lines

Every combination vehicle has two air-lines, the
service line and the emergency line. They run
between each vehicle (tractor to trailer, trailer to
dolly, dolly to second trailer, etc.)

Service Air-line. The service line (also called the
control line or signal line) carries air, which is
controlled by the foot brake or the trailer hand
brake. Depending on how hard you press the foot
brake or hand valve, the pressure in the service
line will similarly change. The service line is
connected to relay valves. These valves allow the
trailer brakes to be applied more quickly than
would otherwise be possible.

Emergency Air-line. The emergency line (also                  Figure 6.6
called the supply line) has two purposes. First, it
supplies air to the trailer air tanks. Second, the                        Page 6-5
emergency line controls the emergency brakes on
combination vehicles. Loss of air pressure in the
emergency line causes the trailer emergency
brakes to come on. The pressure loss could be
caused by a trailer breaking loose, thus tearing

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

If you do cross the air-lines, supply air will be sent        valves are in the open position except the ones at
to the service line instead of going to charge the            the back of the last trailer, which must be closed.
trailer air tanks. Air will not be available to release
the trailer spring brakes (parking brakes). If the
spring brakes don't release when you push the
trailer air supply control, check the air-line
connections.

Older trailers do not have spring brakes. If the air
supply in the trailer air tank has leaked away there
will be no emergency brakes, and the trailer
wheels will turn freely. If you crossed the air-lines,
you could drive away but you wouldn't have trailer
brakes. This would be very dangerous. Always test
the trailer brakes before driving with the hand valve
or by pulling the air supply (tractor protection valve)
control. Pull gently against them in a low gear to
make sure the brakes work.

Some vehicles have "dead end" or dummy
couplers to which the hoses may be attached
when they are not in use. This will prevent water
and dirt from getting into the coupler and the air-
lines. Use the dummy couplers when the air-lines
are not connected to a trailer. If there are no
dummy couplers, the glad hands can sometimes
be locked together (depending on the couplings). It
is very important to keep the air supply clean.

6.2.6 ­ Trailer Air Tanks

Each trailer and converter dolly has one or more
air tanks. They are filled by the emergency (supply)
line from the tractor. They provide the air pressure
used to operate trailer brakes. Air pressure is sent
from the air tanks to the brakes by relay valves.

The pressure in the service line tells how much
pressure the relay valves should send to the trailer
brakes. The pressure in the service line is
controlled by the brake pedal (and the trailer hand
brake).

It is important that you don't let water and oil build
up in the air tanks. If you do, the brakes may not
work correctly. Each tank has a drain valve on it
and you should drain each tank every day. If your
tanks have automatic drains, they will keep most
moisture out. But you should still open the drains to
make sure.

6.2.7 ­ Shut-off Valves

Shut-off valves (also called cut-out cocks) are used
in the service and supply air-lines at the back of
trailers used to tow other trailers. These valves
permit closing the air-lines off when another trailer
is not being towed. You must check that all shut-off

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-6
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

6.2.8 ­ Trailer Service, Parking and Emergency                6.3 ­ Antilock Brake Systems
Brakes
                                                              6.3.1 ­ Trailers Required to Have ABS
Newer trailers have spring brakes just like trucks
and truck tractors. However, converter dollies and            All trailers and converter dollies built on or after
trailers built before 1975 are not required to have           March 1, 1998, are required to have ABS.
spring brakes. Those that do not have spring                  However, many trailers and converter dollies built
brakes have emergency brakes, which work from                 before this date have been voluntarily equipped
the air stored in the trailer air tank. The emergency         with ABS.
brakes come on whenever air pressure in the
emergency line is lost. These trailers have no                Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on
parking brake. The emergency brakes come on                   the left side, either on the front or rear corner. See
whenever the air supply knob is pulled out or the             Figure 6.7. Dollies manufactured on or after March
trailer is disconnected. A major leak in the                  1, 1998, are required to have a lamp on the left
emergency line will cause the tractor protection              side.
valve to close and the trailer emergency brakes to
come on. But the brakes will hold only as long as             In the case of vehicles manufactured before the
there is air pressure in the trailer air tank.                required date, it may be difficult to tell if the unit is
Eventually, the air will leak away and then there             equipped with ABS. Look under the vehicle for the
will be no brakes. Therefore, it is very important for        ECU and wheel speed sensor wires coming from
safety that you use wheel chocks when you park                the back of the brakes.
trailers without spring brakes.

You may not notice a major leak in the service line
until you try to put the brakes on. Then, the air loss
from the leak will lower the air tank pressure
quickly. If it goes low enough, the trailer
emergency brakes will come on.

        Subsection 6.2
    Test Your Knowledge

1.  Why should you not use the trailer hand

    valve while driving?

2.  Describe what the trailer air supply control

    does.

3.  Describe what the service line is for.

4.  What is the emergency air-line for?

5.  Why should you use chocks when parking

    a trailer without spring brakes?

6.  Where are shut-off valves?

These questions may be on your test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsection 6.2.

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                                                         Figure 6.7
Version: July 2014
                                                              6.3.2 ­ Braking with ABS

                                                              ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does
                                                              not decrease or increase your normal braking
                                                              capability. ABS only activates when wheels are
                                                              about to lock up.

                                                              ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping
                                                              distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle
                                                              under control during hard braking.

                                                                                                                                     Page 6-7
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up. The computer               Jaws open.
senses impending lockup, reduces the braking
pressure to a safe level, and you maintain control.           Safety unlocking handle in the automatic lock
                                                              position.
Having ABS on only the trailer, or even on only
one axle, still gives you more control over the               If you have a sliding fifth wheel, make sure it is
vehicle during braking.                                       locked.

When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less            Make sure the trailer kingpin is not bent or broken.
likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control
or start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if        Step 2. Inspect Area and Chock Wheels
you can safely do so) until you gain control.
                                                              Make sure area around the vehicle is clear.
When you drive a tractor-trailer combination with
ABS, you should brake as you always have. In                  Be sure trailer wheels are chocked or spring
other words:                                                  brakes are on.

Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely           Check that cargo (if any) is secured against
and stay in control.                                          movement due to tractor being coupled to the
                                                              trailer.
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you
have ABS on the tractor, the trailer, or both.                Step 3. Position Tractor

As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer            Put the tractor directly in front of the trailer. (Never
and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to           back under the trailer at an angle because you
stay in control.                                              might push the trailer sideways and break the
                                                              landing gear.)
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still
have regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the              Check position, using outside mirrors, by looking
system serviced soon.                                         down both sides of the trailer.

ABS won't allow you to drive faster, follow more              Step 4. Back Slowly
closely, or drive less carefully.
                                                              Back until fifth wheel just touches the trailer.
6.4 ­ Coupling and Uncoupling
                                                              Don't hit the trailer.
Knowing how to couple and uncouple correctly is
basic to safe operation of combination vehicles.              Step 5. Secure Tractor
Wrong coupling and uncoupling can be very
dangerous. General coupling and uncoupling steps              Put on the parking brake.
are listed below. There are differences between
different rigs, so learn the details of coupling and          Put transmission in neutral.
uncoupling the truck(s) you will operate.
                                                              Step 6. Check Trailer Height
6.4.1 ­ Coupling Tractor-Semitrailers
                                                              The trailer should be low enough that it is raised
Step 1. Inspect Fifth Wheel                                   slightly by the tractor when the tractor is backed
                                                              under it. Raise or lower the trailer as needed. (If
Check for damaged/missing parts.                              the trailer is too low, the tractor may strike and
                                                              damage the trailer nose; if the trailer is too high, it
Check to see that mounting to tractor is secure, no           may not couple correctly.)
cracks in frame, etc.
                                                              Check that the kingpin and fifth wheel are aligned.
Be sure that the fifth wheel plate is greased as
required. Failure to keep the fifth wheel plate               Step 7. Connect Air-lines to Trailer
lubricated could cause steering problems because
of friction between the tractor and trailer.                  Check glad hand seals and connect tractor
                                                              emergency air-line to trailer emergency glad hand.
Check if fifth wheel is in proper position for
coupling:                                                     Check glad hand seals and connect tractor service
                                                              air-line to trailer service glad hand.
Wheel tilted down toward rear of tractor.
                                                              Make sure air-lines are safely supported where
                                                              they won't be crushed or caught while tractor is
                                                              backing under the trailer.

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-8
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Step 8. Supply Air to Trailer                                 Go under trailer and look into the back of the fifth
                                                              wheel. Make sure the fifth wheel jaws have closed
From cab, push in "air supply" knob or move                   around the shank of the kingpin.
tractor protection valve control from the
"emergency" to the "normal" position to supply air            Check that the locking lever is in the "lock"
to the trailer brake system.                                  position.

Wait until the air pressure is normal.                        Check that the safety latch is in position over
                                                              locking lever. (On some fifth wheels the catch must
Check brake system for crossed air-lines.                     be put in place by hand.)
Shut engine off so you can hear the brakes.
Apply and release trailer brakes and listen for               If the coupling isn't right, don't drive the coupled
sound of trailer brakes being applied and released.           unit; get it fixed.
You should hear the brakes move when applied
and air escape when the brakes are released.                  Step 14. Connect the Electrical Cord and Check
                                                              Air-lines
Check air brake system pressure gauge for signs
of major air loss.                                            Plug the electrical cord into the trailer and fasten
                                                              the safety catch.
When you are sure trailer brakes are working, start
engine.                                                       Check both air-lines and electrical line for signs of
                                                              damage.
Make sure air pressure is up to normal.
                                                              Make sure air and electrical lines will not hit any
Step 9. Lock Trailer Brakes                                   moving parts of vehicle.

Pull out the "air supply" knob or move the tractor            Step 15. Raise Front Trailer Supports (Landing
protection valve control from "normal" to                     Gear)
"emergency."
                                                              Use low gear range (if so equipped) to begin
Step 10. Back Under Trailer                                   raising the landing gear. Once free of weight,
                                                              switch to the high gear range.
Use lowest reverse gear.
                                                              Raise the landing gear all the way up. (Never drive
Back tractor slowly under trailer to avoid hitting the        with landing gear only part way up as it may catch
kingpin too hard.                                             on railroad tracks or other things.)

Stop when the kingpin is locked into the fifth wheel.         After raising landing gear, secure the crank handle
                                                              safely.
Step 11. Check Connection for Security
                                                              When full weight of trailer is resting on tractor:
Raise trailer landing gear slightly off ground.
                                                              Check for enough clearance between rear of
Pull tractor gently forward while the trailer brakes          tractor frame and landing gear. (When tractor turns
are still locked to check that the trailer is locked          sharply, it must not hit landing gear.)
onto the tractor.
                                                              Check that there is enough clearance between the
Step 12. Secure Vehicle                                       top of the tractor tires and the nose of the trailer.

Put transmission in neutral.                                  Step 16. Remove Trailer Wheel Chocks

Put parking brakes on.                                        Remove and store wheel chocks in a safe place.

Shut off engine and take key with you so someone              6.4.2 ­ Uncoupling Tractor-Semitrailers
else won't move truck while you are under it.
                                                              The following steps will help you to uncouple
Step 13. Inspect Coupling                                     safely.

Use a flashlight, if necessary.                               Step 1. Position Rig

Make sure there is no space between upper and                 Make sure surface of parking area can support
lower fifth wheel. If there is space, something is            weight of trailer.
wrong (kingpin may be on top of the closed fifth
wheel jaws, and trailer would come loose very                 Have tractor lined up with the trailer. (Pulling out at
easily).                                                      an angle can damage landing gear.)

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-9
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Step 2. Ease Pressure on Locking Jaws                         Step 8. Secure Tractor
                                                              Apply parking brake.
Shut off trailer air supply to lock trailer brakes.           Place transmission in neutral.

Ease pressure on fifth wheel locking jaws by                  Step 9. Inspect Trailer Supports
backing up gently. (This will help you release the            Make sure ground is supporting trailer.
fifth wheel locking lever.)                                   Make sure landing gear is not damaged.

Put parking brakes on while tractor is pushing
against the kingpin. (This will hold rig with pressure
off the locking jaws.)

Step 3. Chock Trailer Wheels                                  Step 10. Pull Tractor Clear of Trailer
                                                              Release parking brakes.
Chock the trailer wheels if the trailer doesn't have          Check the area and drive tractor forward until it
spring brakes or if you're not sure. (The air could           clears.
leak out of the trailer air tank, releasing its
emergency brakes. Without chocks, the trailer                            Subsections 6.3 and 6.4
could move.)                                                               Test Your Knowledge

Step 4. Lower the Landing Gear                                1. What might happen if the trailer is too high
                                                                   when you try to couple?
If trailer is empty, lower the landing gear until it
makes firm contact with the ground.                           2. After coupling, how much space should be
                                                                   between the upper and lower fifth wheel?
If trailer is loaded, after the landing gear makes
firm contact with the ground, turn crank in low gear          3. You should look into the back of the fifth wheel
a few extra turns. This will lift some weight off the              to see if it is locked onto the kingpin. True or
tractor. (Do not lift trailer off the fifth wheel.) This           False?
will:
                                                              4. To drive you need to raise the landing gear
Make it easier to unlatch fifth wheel.                             only until it just lifts off the pavement. True or
                                                                   False?
Make it easier to couple next time.
                                                              5. How do you know if your trailer is equipped
Step 5. Disconnect Air-lines and Electrical                        with antilock brakes?
Cable
                                                              These questions may be on your test. If you can't
Disconnect air-lines from trailer. Connect air-line           answer them all, re-read subsections 6.3 and 6.4.
glad hands to dummy couplers at back of cab or
couple them together.                                         6.5 ­ Inspecting a Combination Vehicle

Hang electrical cable with plug down to prevent               Use the seven-step inspection procedure
moisture from entering it.                                    described in Section 2 to inspect your combination
                                                              vehicle. There are more things to inspect on a
Make sure lines are supported so they won't be                combination vehicle than on a single vehicle. (For
damaged while driving the tractor.                            example, tires, wheels, lights, reflectors, etc.)
                                                              However, there are also some new things to check.
Step 6. Unlock Fifth Wheel                                    These are discussed below.

Raise the release handle lock.                                6.5.1 ­ Additional Things to Check during a
                                                              Walk-around Inspection
Pull the release handle to "open" position.
                                                              Do these checks in addition to those already listed
Keep legs and feet clear of the rear tractor wheels           in Section 2.
to avoid serious injury in case the vehicle moves.
                                                              Coupling System Areas
Step 7. Pull Tractor Partially Clear of Trailer               Check fifth wheel (lower).

Pull tractor forward until fifth wheel comes out from
under the trailer.

Stop with tractor frame under trailer (prevents
trailer from falling to ground if landing gear should
collapse or sink).

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                                                                       Page 6-10
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Securely mounted to frame.                                    Fully raised, no missing parts, not bent or
                                                              otherwise damaged.
    No missing or damaged parts.                              Crank handle in place and secured.
                                                              If power operated, no air or hydraulic leaks.
    Enough grease.
                                                              6.5.2 ­ Combination Vehicle Brake Check
    No visible space between upper and lower fifth            Do these checks in addition to Section 5.3:
    wheel.                                                    Inspecting Air Brake Systems.

    Locking jaws around the shank, not the head of            The following section explains how to check air
    kingpin. See Figure 6.8.                                  brakes on combination vehicles. Check the brakes
                                                              on a double or triple trailer as you would any
    Release arm properly seated and safety                    combination vehicle.
    latch/lock engaged.

                           Figure 6.8                         Check That Air Flows to All Trailers. Use the
Check fifth wheel (upper).                                    tractor parking brake and/or chock the wheels to
Glide plate securely mounted to trailer frame.                hold the vehicle. Wait for air pressure to reach
Kingpin not damaged.                                          normal, then push in the red "trailer air supply"
Air and electric lines to trailer.                            knob. This will supply air to the emergency (supply)
Electrical cord firmly plugged in and secured.                lines. Use the trailer handbrake to provide air to the
Air-lines properly connected to glad hands, no air            service line. Go to the rear of the rig. Open the
leaks, properly secured with enough slack for                 emergency line shut-off valve at the rear of the last
turns.                                                        trailer. You should hear air escaping, showing the
All lines free from damage.                                   entire system is charged. Close the emergency line
Sliding fifth wheel.                                          valve. Open the service line valve to check that
Slide not damaged or parts missing.                           service pressure goes through all the trailers (this
Properly greased.                                             test assumes that the trailer handbrake or the
All locking pins present and locked in place.                 service brake pedal is on), and then close the
If air powered--no air leaks.                                 valve. If you do NOT hear air escaping from both
Check that fifth wheel is not so far forward that             lines, check that the shut-off valves on the trailer(s)
tractor frame will hit landing gear, or the cab hit the       and dolly(ies) are in the OPEN position. You MUST
trailer, during turns.                                        have air all the way to the back for all the brakes to
                                                              work.
Landing Gear
                                                              Test Tractor Protection Valve. Charge the trailer
                                                              Air-brake system. (That is, build up normal air-
                                                              pressure and push the "air supply" knob in.) Shut
                                                              the engine off. Step on and off the brake pedal
                                                              several times to reduce the air pressure in the
                                                              tanks. The trailer air supply control (also called the
                                                              tractor protection valve control) should pop out (or
                                                              go from "normal" to "emergency" position) when
                                                              the air pressure falls into the pressure range
                                                              specified by the manufacturer. (Usually within the
                                                              range of 20 to 45 psi.)

                                                              If the tractor protection valve doesn't work right, an
                                                              air hose or trailer brake leak could drain all the air
                                                              from the tractor. This would cause the emergency
                                                              brakes to come on, with possible loss of control.

                                                              Test Trailer Emergency Brakes. Charge the
                                                              trailer air brake system and check that the trailer
                                                              rolls freely. Then stop and pull out the trailer air
                                                              supply control (also called tractor protection valve
                                                              control or trailer emergency valve), or place it in
                                                              the "emergency" position. Pull gently on the trailer

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-11
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

with the tractor to check that the trailer emergency          Test Trailer Service Brakes. Check for normal air
brakes are on.                                                pressure, release the parking brakes, move the
                                                              vehicle forward slowly, and apply trailer brakes
                                                              with the hand control (trolley valve), if so equipped.
                                                              You should feel the brakes come on. This tells you
                                                              the trailer brakes are connected and working. (The
                                                              trailer brakes should be tested with the hand valve
                                                              but controlled in normal operation with the foot
                                                              pedal, which applies air to the service brakes at all
                                                              wheels.)

                                                                               Subsection 6.5
                                                                           Test Your Knowledge

                                                              1. Which shut-off valves should be open and
                                                                   which closed?

                                                              2. How can you test that air flows to all trailers?
                                                              3. How can you test the tractor protection valve?
                                                              4. How can you test the trailer emergency

                                                                   brakes?
                                                              5. How can you test the trailer service brakes?

                                                              These questions may be on your test. If you can't
                                                              answer all of them, re-read subsection 6.5.

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-12
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

               THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Section 6 - Combination Vehicles                              Page 6-13
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 7                                          7.1.5 ­ Manage Space
 DOUBLES AND TRIPLES
                                                              Doubles and triples take up more space than other
This Section Covers                                           commercial vehicles. They are not only longer, but
                                                              also need more space because they can't be
 Pulling Double/Triple Trailers                               turned or stopped suddenly. Allow more following
 Coupling and Uncoupling                                      distance. Make sure you have large enough gaps
 Inspecting Doubles and Triples                               before entering or crossing traffic. Be certain you
 Checking Air Brakes                                          are clear at the sides before changing lanes.

This section has information you need to pass the             7.1.6 ­ Adverse Conditions
CDL knowledge test for driving safely with double
and triple trailers. It tells about how important it is       Be more careful in adverse conditions. In bad
to be very careful when driving with more than one            weather, slippery conditions, and mountain driving,
trailer, how to couple and uncouple correctly, and            you must be especially careful if you drive double
about inspecting doubles and triples carefully. (You          and triple bottoms. You will have greater length
should also study Sections 2, 5, and 6.)                      and more dead axles to pull with your drive axles
                                                              than other drivers. There is more chance for skids
7.1 ­ Pulling Double/Triple Trailers                          and loss of traction.

Take special care when pulling two and three                  7.1.7 ­ Parking the Vehicle
trailers. There are more things that can go wrong,
and doubles/triples are less stable than other                Make sure you do not get in a spot you cannot pull
commercial vehicles. Some areas of concern are                straight through. You need to be aware of how
discussed below.                                              parking lots are arranged in order to avoid a long
                                                              and difficult escape.
7.1.1 ­ Prevent Trailer from Rolling Over
                                                              7.1.8 ­ Antilock Braking Systems on Converter
To prevent trailers from rolling over, you must steer         Dollies
gently and go slowly around corners, on ramps, off
ramps, and curves. A safe speed on a curve for a              Converter dollies built on or after March 1, 1998,
straight truck or a single trailer combination vehicle        are required to have antilock brakes. These dollies
may be too fast for a set of doubles or triples.              will have a yellow lamp on the left side of the dolly.

7.1.2 ­ Beware of the Crack-the-whip Effect                   7.2 ­ Coupling and Uncoupling

Doubles and triples are more likely to turn over              Knowing how to couple and uncouple correctly is
than other combination vehicles because of the                basic to safe operation of doubles and triples.
"crack-the-whip" effect. You must steer gently                Wrong coupling and uncoupling can be very
when pulling trailers. The last trailer in a                  dangerous. Coupling and uncoupling steps for
combination is most likely to turn over. If you don't         doubles and triples are listed below.
understand the crack-the-whip effect, study
subsection 6.1.2 of this manual.                              7.2.1 ­ Coupling Twin Trailers

7.1.3 ­ Inspect Completely                                    Secure Second (Rear) Trailer

There are more critical parts to check when you               If the second trailer doesn't have spring brakes,
have two or three trailers. Check them all. Follow            drive the tractor close to the trailer, connect the
the procedures described later in this section.               emergency line, charge the trailer air tank, and
                                                              disconnect the emergency line. This will set the
7.1.4 ­ Look Far Ahead                                        trailer emergency brakes (if the slack adjusters are
                                                              correctly adjusted). Chock the wheels if you have
Doubles and triples must be driven very smoothly              any doubt about the brakes.
to avoid rollover or jackknife. Therefore, look far
ahead so you can slow down or change lanes                    For the safest handling on the road, the more
gradually when necessary.                                     heavily loaded semitrailer should be in first position
                                                              behind the tractor. The lighter trailer should be in
                                                              the rear.

Section 7 - Doubles and Triples                               Page 7-1
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

A converter gear on a dolly is a coupling device of           Connect Converter Dolly to Rear Trailer
one or two axles and a fifth wheel by which a
semitrailer can be coupled to the rear of a tractor-          Make sure trailer brakes are locked and/or wheels
trailer combination forming a double bottom rig.              chocked.
See Figure 7.1.
                                                              Make sure trailer height is correct. (It must be
                           Figure 7.1                         slightly lower than the center of the fifth wheel, so
                                                              trailer is raised slightly when dolly is pushed
Position Converter Dolly in Front of Second                   under.)
(Rear) Trailer
                                                              Back converter dolly under rear trailer.
Release dolly brakes by opening the air tank
petcock. (Or, if the dolly has spring brakes, use the         Raise landing gear slightly off ground to prevent
dolly parking brake control.)                                 damage if trailer moves.

If the distance is not too great, wheel the dolly into        Test coupling by pulling against pin of the second
position by hand so it is in line with the kingpin.           semitrailer.

Or, use the tractor and first semitrailer to pick up          Make visual check of coupling. (No space between
the converter dolly:                                          upper and lower fifth wheel. Locking jaws closed
Position combination as close as possible to                  on kingpin.)
converter dolly.
Move dolly to rear of first semitrailer and couple it         Connect safety chains, air hoses, and light cords.
to the trailer.
Lock pintle hook.                                             Close converter dolly air tank petcock and shut-off
Secure dolly support in raised position.                      valves at rear of second trailer (service and
Pull dolly into position as close as possible to nose         emergency shut-offs).
of the second semitrailer.
Lower dolly support.                                          Open shut-off valves at rear of first trailer (and on
Unhook dolly from first trailer.                              dolly if so equipped).
Wheel dolly into position in front of second trailer in
line with the kingpin.                                        Raise landing gear completely.

Connect Converter Dolly to Front Trailer                      Charge trailer brakes (push "air supply" knob in),
Back first semitrailer into position in front of dolly        and check for air at rear of second trailer by
tongue.                                                       opening the emergency line shut-off. If air pressure
Hook dolly to front trailer.                                  isn't there, something is wrong and the brakes
Lock pintle hook.                                             won't work.
Secure converter gear support in raised position.
                                                              7.2.2 ­ Uncoupling Twin Trailers

                                                              Uncouple Rear Trailer

                                                              Park rig in a straight line on firm level ground.

                                                              Apply parking brakes so rig won't move.

                                                              Chock wheels of second trailer if it doesn't have
                                                              spring brakes.

                                                              Lower landing gear of second semitrailer enough
                                                              to remove some weight from dolly.

                                                              Close air shut-offs at rear of first semitrailer (and
                                                              on dolly if so equipped).

                                                              Disconnect all dolly air and electric lines and
                                                              secure them.

                                                              Release dolly brakes.

                                                              Release converter dolly fifth wheel latch.

                                                              Slowly pull tractor, first semitrailer, and dolly
                                                              forward to pull dolly out from under rear semitrailer.

Section 7 - Doubles and Triples                               Page 7-2
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Uncouple Converter Dolly                                      also some new things to check. These are
                                                              discussed below.
Lower dolly landing gear.                                     7.3.1 ­ Additional Checks

Disconnect safety chains.                                     Do these checks in addition to those already listed
                                                              in Section 2, Step 5: Do a Walk-around Inspection.
Apply converter gear spring brakes or chock
wheels.                                                       Coupling System Areas
                                                              Check fifth wheel (lower).
Release pintle hook on first semi-trailer.                    Securely mounted to frame.
                                                              No missing or damaged parts.
Slowly pull clear of dolly.                                   Enough grease.
                                                              No visible space between upper and lower fifth
Never unlock the pintle hook with the dolly still             wheel.
under the rear trailer. The dolly tow bar may fly up,         Locking jaws around the shank, not the head of
possibly causing injury, and making it very difficult         kingpin.
to re-couple.                                                 Release arm properly seated and safety latch/lock
                                                              engaged.
7.2.3 ­ Coupling and Uncoupling Triple Trailers               Check fifth wheel (upper).
                                                              Glide plate securely mounted to trailer frame.
Couple Tractor/First Semitrailer to                           Kingpin not damaged.
Second/Third Trailers                                         Air and electric lines to trailer.
                                                              Electrical cord firmly plugged in and secured.
Couple tractor to first trailer. Use the method               Air-lines properly connected to glad hands, no air
already described for coupling tractor-semitrailers.          leaks, properly secured with enough slack for
                                                              turns.
Move converter dolly into position and couple first           All lines free from damage.
trailer to second trailer using the method for                Sliding fifth wheel.
coupling doubles. Triples rig is now complete.                Slide not damaged or parts missing.
                                                              Properly greased.
Uncouple Triple-trailer Rig                                   All locking pins present and locked in place.
                                                              If air powered, no air leaks.
Uncouple third trailer by pulling the dolly out, then         Check that fifth wheel is not so far forward that the
unhitching the dolly using the method for                     tractor frame will hit landing gear, or cab will hit the
uncoupling doubles.                                           trailer, during turns.
                                                              Landing Gear
Uncouple remainder of rig as you would any                    Fully raised, no missing parts, not bent or
double-bottom rig using the method already                    otherwise damaged.
described.                                                    Crank handle in place and secured.
                                                              If power operated, no air or hydraulic leaks.
7.2.4 ­ Coupling and Uncoupling Other
Combinations                                                  Double and Triple Trailers

The methods described so far apply to the more                Shut-off valves (at rear of trailers, in service and
common tractor-trailer combinations. However,                 emergency lines).
there are other ways of coupling and uncoupling
the many types of truck-trailer and tractor-trailer           Rear of front trailers: OPEN.
combinations that are in use. There are too many
to cover in this manual. You will need to learn the           Rear of last trailer: CLOSED.
correct way to couple and uncouple the vehicle(s)
you will drive according to the manufacturer and/or                                          Page 7-3
owner specifications.

7.3 ­ Inspecting Doubles and Triples

Use the seven-step inspection procedure
described in Section 2 to inspect your combination
vehicle. There are more things to inspect on a
combination vehicle than on a single vehicle. Many
of these items are simply more of what you would
find on a single vehicle. (For example, tires,
wheels, lights, reflectors, etc.) However, there are

Section 7 - Doubles and Triples
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Converter dolly air tank drain valve: CLOSED.                 go from "normal" to "emergency" position) when
                                                              the air pressure falls into the pressure range
Be sure air-lines are supported and glad hands are            specified by the manufacturer. (Usually within the
properly connected.                                           range of 20 to 45 psi.)

If spare tire is carried on converter gear (dolly),           If the tractor protection valve doesn't work properly,
make sure it's secured.                                       an air hose or trailer brake leak could drain all the
                                                              air from the tractor. This would cause the
Be sure pintle-eye of dolly is in place in pintle hook        emergency brakes to come on, with possible loss
of trailer(s).                                                of control.

Make sure pintle hook is latched.                             Test Trailer Emergency Brakes. Charge the
                                                              trailer air brake system and check that the trailer
Safety chains should be secured to trailer(s).                rolls freely. Then stop and pull out the trailer air
                                                              supply control (also called tractor protection valve
Be sure light cords are firmly in sockets on trailers.        control or trailer emergency valve) or place it in the
                                                              "emergency" position. Pull gently on the trailer with
7.3.2 ­ Additional Things to Check during a                   the tractor to check that the trailer emergency
Walk-around Inspection                                        brakes are on.
Do these checks in addition to subsection 5.3,
Inspecting Air Brake Systems.                                 Test Trailer Service Brakes. Check for normal air
                                                              pressure, release the parking brakes, move the
7.4 ­ Doubles/Triples Air Brake Check                         vehicle forward slowly, and apply trailer brakes
                                                              with the hand control (trolley valve), if so equipped.
Check the brakes on a double or triple trailer as             You should feel the brakes come on. This tells you
you would any combination vehicle. Subsection                 the trailer brakes are connected and working. (The
6.5.2 explains how to check air brakes on                     trailer brakes should be tested with the hand valve,
combination vehicles. You must also make the                  but controlled in normal operation with the foot
following checks on your double or triple trailers            pedal, which applies air to the service brakes at all
                                                              wheels.)
7.4.1 ­ Additional Air Brake Checks
                                                                                         Section 7
Check That Air Flows to All Trailers (Double                                    Test Your Knowledge
and Triple Trailers). Use the tractor parking brake
and/or chock the wheels to hold the vehicle. Wait             1. What is a converter dolly?
for air pressure to reach normal, then push in the            2. Do converter dollies have spring brakes?
red "trailer air supply" knob. This will supply air to        3. What three methods can you use to secure a
the emergency (supply) lines. Use the trailer
handbrake to provide air to the service line. Go to                   second trailer before coupling?
the rear of the rig. Open the emergency line shut-            4. How do you check to make sure trailer
off valve at the rear of the last trailer. You should
hear air escaping, showing the entire system is                       height is correct before coupling?
charged. Close the emergency line valve. Open                 5. What do you check when making a visual
the service line valve to check that service
pressure goes through all the trailers (this test                     check of coupling?
assumes that the trailer handbrake or the service             6. Why should you pull a dolly out from under a
brake pedal is on), and then close the valve. If you
do NOT hear air escaping from both lines, check                       trailer before you disconnect it from the
that the shut-off valves on the trailer(s) and                        trailer in front?
dolly(ies) are in the OPEN position. You MUST                 7. What should you check for when inspecting
have air all the way to the back for all the brakes to                the converter dolly? The pintle hook?
work.                                                         8. Should the shut-off valves on the rear of the
                                                                      last trailer be open or closed? On the first
Test Tractor Protection Valve. Charge the trailer                     trailer in a set of doubles? On the middle
air brake system. (That is, build up normal air                       trailer of a set of triples?
pressure and push the "air supply" knob in.) Shut             9. How can you test that air flows to all trailers?
the engine off. Step on and off the brake pedal               10. How do you know if your converter dolly is
several times to reduce the air pressure in the                       equipped with antilock brakes?
tanks. The trailer air supply control (also called the
tractor protection valve control) should pop out (or          These questions may be on your test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read Section 7.

Section 7 - Doubles and Triples                               Page 7-4
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 8                                          Check manhole covers and vents. Make sure the
      TANK VEHICLES                                           covers have gaskets and they close correctly.
                                                              Keep the vents clear so they work correctly.
This Section Covers
                                                              8.1.2 ­ Check Special Purpose Equipment
 Inspecting Tank Vehicles                                     If your vehicle has any of the following equipment,
 Driving Tank Vehicles                                        make sure it works:
 Safe Driving Rules                                           Vapor recovery kits.
                                                              Grounding and bonding cables.
This section has information needed to pass the               Emergency shut-off systems.
CDL knowledge test for driving a tank vehicle. (You           Built in fire extinguisher.
should also study Sections 2, 5, 6, and 9). A tank            Never drive a tank vehicle with open valves or
endorsement is required for certain vehicles that             manhole covers.
transport liquids or gases. The liquid or gas does
not have to be a hazardous material. A tank                   8.1.3 ­ Special Equipment
endorsement is required if your vehicle needs a               Check the emergency equipment required for your
Class A or B CDL and you want to haul a liquid or             vehicle. Find out what equipment you're required to
liquid gas in a tank or tanks having an individual            carry and make sure you have it (and it works).
rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an
aggregate rated capacity of 1000 gallons or more              8.2 ­ Driving Tank Vehicles
that is either permanently or temporarily attached
to the vehicle or the chassis. A tank endorsement             Hauling liquids in tanks requires special skills
is also required for Class C vehicles when the                because of the high center of gravity and liquid
vehicle is used to transport hazardous materials in           movement. See Figure 8.1.
liquid or gas form in the above described rated
tanks.

Before loading, unloading, or driving a tanker,
inspect the vehicle. This makes sure that the
vehicle is safe to carry the liquid or gas and is safe
to drive.

8.1 ­ Inspecting Tank Vehicles                                                           Figure 8.1

Tank vehicles have special items that you need to             8.2.1 ­ High Center of Gravity
check. Tank vehicles come in many types and                   High center of gravity means that much of the
sizes. You need to check the vehicle's operator               load's weight is carried high up off the road. This
manual to make sure you know how to inspect                   makes the vehicle top-heavy and easy to roll over.
your tank vehicle.                                            Liquid tankers are especially easy to roll over.
                                                              Tests have shown that tankers can turn over at the
8.1.1 ­ Leaks                                                 speed limits posted for curves. Take highway
                                                              curves and on ramp/off ramp curves well below the
On all tank vehicles, the most important item to              posted speeds.
check for is leaks. Check under and around the
vehicle for signs of any leaking. Don't carry liquids                                                                               Page 8-1
or gases in a leaking tank. To do so is a crime. You
will be cited and prevented from driving further.
You may also be liable for the clean-up of any spill.
In general, check the following:

Check the tank's body or shell for dents or leaks.

Check the intake, discharge, and cut-off valves.
Make sure the valves are in the correct position
before loading, unloading, or moving the vehicle.

Check pipes, connections, and hoses for leaks,
especially around joints.

Section 8 - Tank Vehicles
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

8.2.2 ­ Danger of Surge                                       Legal weight limits.

Liquid surge results from movement of the liquid in           8.3 ­ Safe Driving Rules
partially filled tanks. This movement can have bad
effects on handling. For example, when coming to              In order to drive tank vehicles safely, you must
a stop, the liquid will surge back and forth. When            remember to follow all the safe driving rules. A few
the wave hits the end of the tank, it tends to push           of these rules are:
the truck in the direction the wave is moving. If the
truck is on a slippery surface such as ice, the wave          8.3.1 ­ Drive Smoothly
can shove a stopped truck out into an intersection.
The driver of a liquid tanker must be very familiar           Because of the high center of gravity and the surge
with the handling of the vehicle.                             of the liquid, you must start, slow down, and stop
                                                              very smoothly. Also, make smooth turns and lane
8.2.3 ­ Bulkheads                                             changes.

Some liquid tanks are divided into several smaller            8.3.2 ­ Controlling Surge
tanks by bulkheads. When loading and unloading
the smaller tanks, the driver must pay attention to           Keep a steady pressure on the brakes. Do not
weight distribution. Don't put too much weight on             release too soon when coming to a stop.
the front or rear of the vehicle.
                                                              Brake far in advance of a stop and increase your
8.2.4 ­ Baffled Tanks                                         following distance.

Baffled liquid tanks have bulkheads in them with              If you must make a quick stop to avoid a crash,
holes that let the liquid flow through. The baffles           use controlled or stab braking. If you do not
help to control the forward and backward liquid               remember how to stop using these methods,
surge. Side-to-side surge can still occur. This can           review subsection 2.17.2. Also, remember that if
cause a roll over.                                            you steer quickly while braking, your vehicle may
                                                              roll over.
8.2.5 ­ Un-baffled Tanks
                                                              8.3.3 ­ Curves
Un-baffled liquid tankers (sometimes called
"smooth bore" tanks) have nothing inside to slow              Slow down before curves, then accelerate slightly
down the flow of the liquid. Therefore, forward-and-          through the curve. The posted speed for a curve
back surge is very strong. Un-baffled tanks are               may be too fast for a tank vehicle.
usually those that transport food products (milk, for
example). (Sanitation regulations forbid the use of           8.3.4 ­ Stopping Distance
baffles because of the difficulty in cleaning the
inside of the tank.) Be extremely cautious (slow              Keep in mind how much space you need to stop
and careful) in driving smooth bore tanks,                    your vehicle. Remember that wet roads double the
especially when starting and stopping.                        normal stopping distance. Empty tank vehicles
                                                              may take longer to stop than full ones.
8.2.6 ­ Outage
                                                              8.3.5 ­ Skids
Never load a cargo tank totally full. Liquids expand
as they warm and you must leave room for the                  Don't over steer, over accelerate, or over brake. If
expanding liquid. This is called "outage." Since              you do, your vehicle may skid. On tank trailers, if
different liquids expand by different amounts, they           your drive wheels or trailer wheels begin to skid,
require different amounts of outage. You must                 your vehicle may jackknife. When any vehicle
know the outage requirement when hauling liquids              starts to skid, you must take action to restore
in bulk.                                                      traction to the wheels.

8.2.7 ­ How Much to Load?                                                 Section 8
                                                                  Test Your Knowledge
A full tank of dense liquid (such as some acids)
may exceed legal weight limits. For that reason,              1.  How are bulkheads different than baffles?
you may often only partially fill tanks with heavy
liquids. The amount of liquid to load into a tank             2.  Should a tank vehicle take curves, on
depends on:
                                                                  ramps, or off ramps at the posted speed
The amount the liquid will expand in transit.
                                                                  limits?
The weight of the liquid.
                                                              3.  How are smooth bore tankers different to
Section 8 - Tank Vehicles
Version: July 2014                                                drive than those with baffles?

                                                                                                  Page 8-2
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

4.  What three things determine how much                      5.  What is outage?

    liquid you can load?                                      6.  How can you help control surge?

                                                              7.  What two reasons make special care

                                                                  necessary when driving tank vehicles?

                                                              These questions may be on the test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read Section 8.

Section 8 - Tank Vehicles                                                                          Page 8-3
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                     THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.

Section 8 - Tank Vehicles                                     Page 8-4
Version: July 2013
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 9                                          You must have a commercial driver license (CDL)
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS                                           with a hazardous materials endorsement before
                                                              you drive any size vehicle that is used to transport
             This Section Covers                              hazardous material as defined in 49 CFR 383.5.
                                                              You must pass a written test about the regulations
                                                              and requirements to get this endorsement.

 The Intent of the Regulations                                Everything you need to know to pass the written
 Bulk Tank Loading, Unloading, and                            test is in this section. However, this is only a
                                                              beginning. Most drivers need to know much more
    Marking                                                   on the job. You can learn more by reading and
 Driver Responsibilities                                      understanding the federal and state rules
 Driving and Parking Rules                                    applicable to hazardous materials, as well as,
 Communications Rules                                         attending hazardous materials training courses.
 Emergencies                                                  Your employer, colleges and universities, and
 Loading and Unloading                                        various associations usually offer these courses.
                                                              You can get copies of the Federal Regulations (49
Hazardous materials are products that pose a risk             CFR) through your local Government Printing
to health, safety, and property during                        Office bookstore and various industry publishers.
transportation. The term often is shortened to                Union or company offices often have copies of the
HAZMAT, which you may see on road signs, or to                rules for driver use. Find out where you can get
HM in government regulations. Hazardous                       your own copy to use on the job.
materials include explosives, various types of gas,
solids, flammable and combustible liquid, and other           The regulations require training and testing for all
materials. Because of the risks involved and the              drivers involved in transporting hazardous
potential consequences these risks impose, all                materials. Your employer or a designated
levels of government regulate the handling of                 representative is required to provide this training
hazardous materials.                                          and testing. Hazardous materials employers are
                                                              required to keep a record of training for each
The Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR) is                  employee as long as that employee is working with
found in parts 100 - 185 of title 49 of the Code of           hazardous materials, and for 90 days thereafter.
Federal Regulations. The common reference for                 The regulations require that hazardous materials
these regulations is 49 CFR 100 - 185                         employees be trained and tested at least once
                                                              every three years.

The Hazardous Materials Table in the regulations              All drivers must be trained in the security risks of
contains a list of these items. However, this list is         hazardous materials transportation. This training
not all-inclusive. Whether or not a material is               must include how to recognize and respond to
considered hazardous is based on its                          possible security threats.
characteristics and the shipper's decision on
whether or not the material meets a definition of a           The regulations also require that drivers have
hazardous material in the regulations.                        special training before driving a vehicle
                                                              transporting certain flammable gas materials or
The regulations require vehicles transporting                 highway route controlled quantities of radioactive
certain types or quantities of hazardous materials            materials. In addition, drivers transporting cargo
to display diamond-shaped, square on point,                   tanks and portable tanks must receive specialized
warning signs called placards.                                training. Each driver's employer or his or her
                                                              designated representative must provide such
This section is designed to assist you in                     training.
understanding your role and responsibilities in
hauling hazardous materials. Due to the constantly            Some locations require permits to transport certain
changing nature of government regulations, it is              explosives or bulk hazardous wastes. States and
impossible to guarantee absolute accuracy of the              counties also may require drivers to follow special
materials in this section. An up-to-date copy of the          hazardous materials routes. The federal
complete regulations is essential for you to have.            government may require permits or exemptions for
Included in these regulations is a complete                   special hazardous materials cargo such as rocket
glossary of terms.                                            fuel. Find out about permits, exemptions, and
                                                              special routes for the places you drive.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-1
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

9.1 ­ The Intent of the Regulations                           Identification number
                                                              Proper shipping name.
9.1.1 ­ Contain the Material                                  Hazard class.
                                                              Packing group.
Transporting hazardous materials can be risky.                Correct packaging.
The regulations are intended to protect you, those            Correct label and markings.
around you, and the environment. They tell                    Correct placards.
shippers how to package the materials safely and              Must package, mark, and label the materials;
drivers how to load, transport, and unload the                prepare shipping papers; provide emergency
material. These are called "containment rules."               response information; and supply placards.
                                                              Certify on the shipping paper that the shipment has
9.1.2 ­ Communicate the Risk                                  been prepared according to the rules (unless you
                                                              are pulling cargo tanks supplied by you or your
To communicate the risk, shippers must warn                   employer).
drivers and others about the material's hazards.
The regulations require shippers to put hazard                9.2.2 ­ The Carrier
warning labels on packages, provide proper                    Takes the shipment from the shipper to its
shipping papers, emergency response information,              destination.
and placards. These steps communicate the                     Prior to transportation, checks that the shipper
hazard to the shipper, the carrier, and the driver.           correctly described, marked, labeled, and
                                                              otherwise prepared the shipment for transportation.
9.1.3 ­ Assure Safe Drivers and Equipment                     Refuses improper shipments.
                                                              Reports accidents and incidents involving
In order to get a hazardous materials endorsement             hazardous materials to the proper government
on a CDL, you must pass a written test about                  agency.
transporting hazardous materials. To pass the test,
you must know how to:                                         9.2.3 ­ The Driver
                                                              Makes sure the shipper has identified, marked, and
Identify what are hazardous materials.                        labeled the hazardous materials properly.
                                                              Refuses leaking packages and shipments.
Safely load shipments.                                        Placards vehicle when loading, if required.
                                                              Safely transports the shipment without delay.
Properly placard your vehicle in accordance with              Follows all special rules about transporting
the rules.                                                    hazardous materials.
                                                              Keeps hazardous materials shipping papers and
Safely transport shipments.                                   emergency response information in the proper
                                                              place.
Learn the rules and follow them. Following the
rules reduces the risk of injury from hazardous               9.3 ­ Communication Rules
materials. Taking shortcuts by breaking rules is
unsafe. Non-compliance with regulations can result            9.3.1 ­ Definitions
in fines and jail.
                                                              Some words and phrases have special meanings
Inspect your vehicle before and during each trip.             when talking about hazardous materials. Some of
Law enforcement officers may stop and inspect                 these may differ from meanings you are used to.
your vehicle. When stopped, they may check your               The words and phrases in this section may be on
shipping papers, vehicle placards, and the                    your test. The meanings of other important words
hazardous materials endorsement on your driver                are in the glossary at the end of Section 9.
license, and your knowledge of hazardous
materials.                                                                                                                           Page 9-2

9.2 ­ Hazardous Materials
Transportation--Who Does What

9.2.1 ­ The Shipper

Sends products from one place to another by truck,
rail, vessel, or airplane.

Uses the hazardous materials regulations to
determine the product's:

Section 9 - Hazardous Material
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

A material's hazard class reflects the risks                   being carried. Your life, and the lives of others,
associated with it. There are nine different hazard            may depend on quickly locating the hazardous
classes. The types of materials included in these              materials shipping papers. For that reason the
nine classes are in Figure 9.1.                                rules require:

               Hazardous Materials Class                       Shippers to describe hazardous materials correctly
                                                               and include an emergency response telephone
        Division  Name of Class or       Examples              number on shipping papers.
Class             Division
                                                               Carriers and drivers to quickly identify hazardous
       1.1 Mass Explosion                Dynamite              materials shipping papers, or keep them on top of
       1.2 Projection Hazard             Flares                other shipping papers and keep the required
       1.3 Fire Hazard                   Display Fireworks     emergency response information with the shipping
1 1.4 Minor Explosion                    Ammunition            papers.
       1.5 Very Insensitive              Blasting Agents
       1.6 Extremely                     Explosive Devices     Drivers to keep hazardous materials shipping
                                                               papers:
                Insensitive
                                                               In a pouch on the driver's door, or
   2.1 Flammable Gases                   Propane
                                         Helium                In clear view within immediate reach while the seat
2  2.2            Non-Flammable                                belt is fastened while driving, or
                  Gases                  Fluorine, Compressed
                                                               On the driver's seat when out of the vehicle.
   2.3 Poisonous/Toxic                   Gasoline
                                                               9.3.2 ­ Package Labels
                  Gases                  Ammonium Picrate,
                                         Wetted                Shippers put diamond-shaped hazard warning
3-                Flammable Liquids      White Phosphorus      labels on most hazardous materials packages.
                                         Sodium                These labels inform others of the hazard. If the
4  4.1            Flammable Solids                             diamond label won't fit on the package, shippers
   4.2            Spontaneously                                may put the label on a tag securely attached to the
                  Combustible                                  package. For example, compressed gas cylinders
                                                               that will not hold a label will have tags or decals.
   4.3            Dangerous When                               Labels look like the examples in Figure 9.2.
                  Wet

5  5.1            Oxidizers              Ammonium Nitrate
   5.2            Organic Peroxides      Methyl Ethyl Ketone
                                         Peroxide

   6.1 Poison (Toxic                     Potassium Cyanide

6                 Material)

   6.2 Infectious                        Anthrax Virus

                  Substances

7-                Radioactive            Uranium

8-                Corrosives             Battery Fluid

9-                Miscellaneous          Polychlorinated

                  Hazardous Materials Biphenyls (PCB)

e-                ORM-D (Other           Food Flavorings,
                  Regulated Material-    Medicines
                  Domestic)

   -              Combustible Liquids Fuel Oil

                             Figure 9.1

A shipping paper describes the hazardous
materials being transported. Shipping orders, bills
of lading, and manifests are all shipping papers.
Figure 9.6 shows an example shipping paper.

After an accident or hazardous materials spill or              Examples of HAZMAT Labels. Figure 9.2
leak, you may be injured and unable to
communicate the hazards of the materials you are
transporting. Firefighters and police can prevent or
reduce the amount of damage or injury at the
scene if they know what hazardous materials are

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                 Page 9-3
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

9.3.3 ­ Lists of Regulated Products                           Appendix B to Section 172.101, the List of Marine
                                                              Pollutants.
Placards. Placards are used to warn others of
hazardous materials. Placards are signs put on the            The Hazardous Materials Table. Figure 9.4
outside of a vehicle and on bulk packages, which              shows part of the Hazardous Materials Table.
identify the hazard class of the cargo. A placarded
vehicle must have at least four identical placards.           Column 1 tells which shipping mode(s) the entry
                                                              affects and other information concerning the
They are put on the front, rear, and both sides of            shipping description. The next five columns show
the vehicle. See Figure 9.3. Placards must be                 each material's shipping name, hazard class or
readable from all four directions. They are at least          division, identification number, packaging group,
10 3/4 inches square, square-on-point, in a                   and required labels.
diamond shape. Cargo tanks and other bulk
packaging display the identification number of their          Six different symbols may appear in Column 1 of
contents on placards or orange panels or white                the table.
square-on-point displays that are the same size as
placards.                                                      (+)  Shows the proper shipping name, hazard
                                                               (A)  class, and packing group to use, even if
           Examples of HAZMAT Placards                         (W)  the material doesn't meet the hazard class
                           Figure 9.3                               definition.
                                                               (D)
Identification numbers are a four-digit code used              (I)  Means the hazardous material described
by first responders to identify hazardous materials.          (G)   in Column 2 is subject to the HMR only
An identification number may be used to identify                    when offered or intended for transport by
more than one chemical. The letters "NA or "UN"                     air unless it is a hazardous substance or
will precede the identification number. The United                  hazardous waste.
States Department of Transportation's Emergency
Response Guidebook (ERG) lists the chemicals                        Means the hazardous material described
and the identification numbers assigned to them.                    in Column 2 is subject to the HMR only
                                                                    when offered or intended for transportation
There are three main lists used by shippers,                        by water unless it is a hazardous
carriers, and drivers when trying to identify                       substance, hazardous waste, or marine
hazardous materials. Before transporting a                          pollutant.
material, look for its name on three lists. Some
materials are on all lists, others on only one.                     Means the proper shipping name is
Always check the following lists:                                   appropriate for describing materials for
Section 172.101, the Hazardous Materials Table.                     domestic transportation, but may not be
Appendix A to Section 172.101, the List of                          proper for international transportation.
Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities.
                                                                    Identifies a proper shipping name that is
Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                      used to describe materials in international
Version: July 2014                                                  transportation. A different shipping name
                                                                    may be used when only domestic
                                                                    transportation is involved.

                                                                    Means this hazardous material described
                                                                    in Column 2 is a generic shipping name. A
                                                                    generic shipping name must be
                                                                    accompanied by a technical name on the
                                                                    shipping paper. A technical name is a
                                                                    specific chemical that makes the product
                                                                    hazardous

                                                              Column 2 lists the proper shipping names and
                                                              descriptions of regulated materials. Entries are in
                                                              alphabetical order so you can more quickly find the
                                                              right entry. The table shows proper shipping
                                                              names in regular type. The shipping paper must
                                                              show proper shipping names. Names shown in
                                                              italics are not proper shipping names.

                                                                    Page 9-4
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                               49 CFR 172.101 Hazardous Materials Table

                                                                                     Packaging (173. ***)

Symbols  Hazardous Materials   Hazard     Identification      PG  Label  Special
         Description & Proper  Class or   Numbers                 Codes  Provisions
         Shipping Names        Division                                  (172.102)
                                                                                                 Non
                                                                                     Exceptions  Bulk      Bulk

(1)      (2)                   (3)        (4)                 (5) (6)    (7)         (8A)        (8B) (8C)
                                                                                                 204 240
A        Acetaldehyde ammonia 9           UN1841              III 9      IB8, IP6    155

                                               Figure 9.4

                                    Appendix A to 49 CFR 172
              List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities

              Hazardous Substances             Reportable Quantity (RQ) Pounds
                                               (Kilograms)
              Phenyl mercaptan @
              Phenylmercury acetate            100 (45.4)
              N-Phenylthiourea                 100 (45.4)
              Phorate                          100 (45.4)
              Phosgene                         10 (4.54)

              Phosphine                        10 (4.54)

              Phosphoric acid                  100 (45.4) *

              Phosphoric acid, diethyl         5,000 (2270)
              4-nitrophenyl ester
                                               100 (45.4)

              Phosphoric acid, lead salt       10 (.454)

              * Spills of 10 pounds or more must be reported.

                                               Figure 9.5

Column 3 shows a material's hazard class or                   shipping description and also appear on the
division, or the entry "Forbidden." Never transport           package. It also must appear on cargo tanks and
a "Forbidden" material. Placard hazardous                     other bulk packaging. Police and firefighters use
materials shipments based on the quantity and                 this number to quickly identify the hazardous
hazard class. You can decide which placards to                materials.
use if you know these three things:
                                                              Column 5 shows the packing group (in Roman
Material's hazard class.                                      numeral) assigned to a material.

Amount being shipped.                                         Column 6 shows the hazard warning label(s)
                                                              shippers must put on packages of hazardous
Amount of all hazardous materials of all classes on           materials. Some products require use of more than
your vehicle.                                                 one label due to a dual hazard being present.

Column 4 lists the identification number for each             Column 7 lists the additional (special) provisions
proper shipping name. Identification numbers are              that apply to this material. When there is an entry
preceded by the letters "UN" or "NA." The letters             in this column, you must refer to the federal
"NA" are associated with proper shipping names                regulations for specific information. The numbers
that are only used within the United States and to            1-6 in this column mean the hazardous material is
and from Canada. The identification number must               a poison inhalation hazard (PIH). PIH materials
appear on the shipping paper as part of the
                                                                                                                                     Page 9-5
Section 9 - Hazardous Material
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

have special requirements for shipping papers,                A proper shipping description for each hazardous
marking, and placards.                                        material.

Column 8 is a three-part column showing the                   A shipper's certification, signed by the shipper,
section numbers covering the packaging                        saying they prepared the shipment according to
requirements for each hazardous material.                     the regulations.

Note: Columns 9 and 10 do not apply to                                         Shipping Paper
transportation by highway.
                                                              TO:       ABC                        DEF          Page
Appendix A to 49 CFR 172.101 - The List of                    Quantity  Corporation                Corporation  1 of 1
Hazardous Substances and Reportable                                     88 Valley                  55
Quantities. The DOT and the EPA want to know                            Street       FROM: Mountain             Weight
about spills of hazardous substances. They are                          Anywhere,                  Street
named in the List of Hazardous Substances and                           VA                         Nowhere,
Reportable Quantities. See Figure 9.5. Column 3                                                    CO
of the list shows each product's reportable quantity                          HM
(RQ). When these materials are being transported                                             Description
in a reportable quantity or greater in one package,
the shipper displays the letters RQ on the shipping           1         RQ           UN1076,Phosgene,           25 lbs
paper and package. The letters RQ may appear                  cylinder               2.3,
before or after the basic description. You or your                      ("RQ"        Poison, Inhalation
employer must report any spill of these materials,                      means that   Hazard,
which occurs in a reportable quantity.                                  this is a    Zone A
                                                                        reportable
If the words INHALATION HAZARD appear on the                            quantity.)   (UN1076 is the
shipping paper or package, the rules require                                         Identification
display of the POISON INHALATION HAZARD or                                           Number from
POISON GAS placards, as appropriate. These                                           Column 4 of the
placards must be used in addition to other                                           Hazardous materials
placards, which may be required by the product's                                     Table.
hazard class. Always display the hazard class
placard and the POISON INHALATION HAZARD                                             Phosgene is the
placard, even for small amounts.                                                     proper shipping
                                                                                     name from Column
Appendix B to 49 CFR 172.101 ­ List of Marine                                        2 of the Hazardous
Pollutants                                                                           Materials Table.

Appendix B is a listing of chemicals that are toxic                                             2.3 is the Hazard
to marine life. For highway transportation, this list                                           Class from Column
is only used for chemicals in a container with a                                                3 of the Hazardous
capacity of 119 gallons or more without a placard                                               Materials Table.)
or label as specified by the HMR.
                                                              This is to certify that the above named materials are
Any bulk packages of a Marine Pollutant must                  properly classified, described, packaged marked and
display the Marine Pollutant marking (white triangle          labeled, and are in proper condition for transportation
with a fish and an "X" through the fish). This                according to the applicable regulations of the
marking (it is not a placard) must also be displayed          Department of Transportation.
on the outside of the vehicle. In addition, a notation
must be made on the shipping papers near the                            DEF                 Carrier:            Safety
description of the material: "Marine Pollutant".
                                                              Shipper: Corporation          Per:                First
9.3.4 ­ The Shipping Paper
                                                              Per:      Smith               Date:
The shipping paper shown in Figure 9.6 describes
a shipment. A shipping paper for hazardous                    Date:     October 15,
materials must include:
                                                                        2003
Page numbers if the shipping paper has more than
one page. The first page must tell the total number           Special Instructions: 24 hour Emergency Contact,
of pages. For example, "Page 1 of 4".
                                                              John Smith 1-800-555-5555

                                                                               Figure 9.6

                                                              9.3.5 ­ The Item Description

                                                              If a shipping paper describes both hazardous and
                                                              non-hazardous products, the hazardous materials
                                                              must be:

                                                              Entered first.

                                                              Highlighted in a contrasting color, OR.

                                                              Identified by an "X" placed before the shipping
                                                              description (ID#, Shipping Name, Hazard Class,

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                                                                  Page 9-6
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Packing Group) in a column captioned "HM". The                The basic description and technical name;
letters "RQ" may be used instead of "X" if a                  Immediate hazards to health;
reportable quantity needs to be identified.                   Risks of fire or explosion;
                                                              Immediate precautions to be taken in the event of
The basic description of hazardous materials                  an accident or incident;
includes the identification number, proper shipping           Immediate methods for handling fires;
name, hazard class or division, and the packing               Initial methods for handling spills or leaks in the
group, if any, in that order. The packing group is            absence of fires; and
displayed in Roman numerals and may be                        Preliminary first aid measures
preceded by "PG".
                                                              Such information can be on the shipping paper or
Identification number, shipping name, and hazard              some other document that includes the basic
class must not be abbreviated unless specifically             description and technical name of the hazardous
authorized in the hazardous materials regulations.            material. Or, it may be in a guidance book such as
The description must also show:                               the Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG).
                                                              Motor carriers may assist shippers by keeping an
The total quantity and unit of measure.                       ERG on each vehicle carrying hazardous
                                                              materials. The driver must provide the emergency
The number and type of packages (example: "6                  response information to any federal, state, or local
Drums").                                                      authority responding to a hazardous materials
                                                              incident or investigating one.
The letters RQ, if a reportable quantity.
                                                              Total quantity and number & type of packages
If the letters RQ appear, the name of the                     must appear before or after the basic description.
hazardous substance (if not included in the                   The packaging type and the unit of measurement
shipping name).                                               may be abbreviated. For example:

For all materials with the letter "G" (Generic) in                      10 ctns. UN1263, Paint, 3, PG II, 500 lbs.
Column 1, the technical name of the hazardous
material.                                                     The shipper of hazardous wastes must put the
                                                              word WASTE before the proper shipping name of
Shipping papers also must list an emergency                   the material on the shipping paper (hazardous
response telephone number (unless excepted).                  waste manifest). For example:
The emergency response telephone number is the
responsibility of the shipper. It can be used by                        UN1090, Waste Acetone, 3, PG II.
emergency responders to obtain information about
any hazardous materials involved in a spill or fire.          A non-hazardous material may not be described by
The telephone number must be:                                 using a hazard class or an identification number.

The number of the person offering the hazardous               Shippers must keep a copy of shipping papers (or
material for transportation (if the shipper/offerer is        an electronic image) for a period of 2 years (3
the emergency response information (ERI)                      years for hazardous waste) after the material is
provider); or                                                 accepted by the initial carrier.

The number of an agency or organization capable               If one provides a carrier service only and is not the
of, and accepting responsibility for, providing the           originator of the shipment, a carrier is required to
detailed information required by paragraph (a)(2) of          keep a copy of the shipping paper (or an electronic
this section. The person who is registered with the           image) for a period of 1 year.
ERI provider must be identified by name, or
contract number or other unique identifier assigned           IMPORTANT NOTE: To view complete regulatory
by the ERI provider, on the shipping paper                    requirements for the transportation of hazardous
                                                              materials one should refer to the Code of Federal
Shippers also must provide emergency response                 Regulations, Title 49, Parts 100-185.
information to the motor carrier for each hazardous
material being shipped. The emergency response
information must be able to be used away from the
motor vehicle and must provide information on how
to safely handle incidents involving the material. At
a minimum, it must include the following
information:

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-7
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

9.3.6 ­ Shipper's Certification                               Does it have:

When the shipper packages hazardous materials,                An entry with a proper shipping name, hazard
he/she certifies that the package has been                    class, and identification number?
prepared according to the rules. The signed
shipper's certification appears on the original               A highlighted entry, or one with an X or RQ in the
shipping paper. The only exceptions are when a                hazardous materials column?
shipper is a private carrier transporting their own
product and when the package is provided by the               Other clues suggesting hazardous materials:
carrier (for example, a cargo tank). Unless a
package is clearly unsafe or does not comply with             What business is the shipper in? Paint dealer?
the HMR, you may accept the shipper's                         Chemical supply? Scientific supply house? Pest
certification concerning proper packaging. Some               control or agricultural supplier? Explosives,
carriers have additional rules about transporting             munitions, or fireworks dealer?
hazardous materials. Follow your employer's rules
when accepting shipments.                                     Are there tanks with diamond labels or placards on
                                                              the premises?
9.3.7 ­ Package Markings and Labels
                                                              What type of package is being shipped? Cylinders
Shippers print required markings directly on the              and drums are often used for hazardous materials
package, an attached label, or tag. An important              shipments.
package marking is the name of the hazardous
material. It is the same name as the one on the               Is a hazard class label, proper shipping name, or
shipping paper. The requirements for marking vary             identification number on the package?
by package size and material being transported.
When required, the shipper will put the following on          Are there any handling precautions?
the package:
                                                              9.3.9 ­ Hazardous Waste Manifest
The name and address of shipper or consignee.
                                                              When transporting hazardous wastes, you must
The hazardous material's shipping name and                    sign by hand and carry a Uniform Hazardous
identification number.                                        Waste Manifest. The name and EPA registration
                                                              number of the shippers, carriers, and destination
The labels required.                                          must appear on the manifest. Shippers must
                                                              prepare, date, and sign by hand the manifest.
It is a good idea to compare the shipping paper to            Treat the manifest as a shipping paper when
the markings and labels. Always make sure that                transporting the waste. Only give the waste
the shipper shows the correct basic description on            shipment to another registered carrier or
the shipping paper, and verifies that the proper              disposal/treatment facility. Each carrier
labels are shown on the packages. If you are not              transporting the shipment must sign by hand the
familiar with the material, ask the shipper to                manifest. After you deliver the shipment, keep your
contact your office.                                          copy of the manifest. Each copy must have all
                                                              needed signatures and dates, including those of
                                                              the person to whom you delivered the waste.

If rules require it, the shipper will put RQ, MARINE          9.3.10 ­ Placarding
POLLUTANT, BIOHAZARD, HOT, or
INHALATION-HAZARD on the package. Packages                    Attach the appropriate placards to the vehicle
with liquid containers inside will also have package          before you drive it. You are only allowed to move
orientation markings with the arrows pointing in the          an improperly placarded vehicle during an
correct upright direction. The labels used always             emergency, in order to protect life or property.
reflect the hazard class of the product. If a package
needs more than one label, the labels must be                 Placards must appear on both sides and both ends
close together, near the proper shipping name.                of the vehicle. Each placard must be:

9.3.8 ­ Recognizing Hazardous Materials                       Easily seen from the direction it faces.

Learn to recognize shipments of hazardous                     Placed so the words or numbers are level and read
materials. To find out if the shipment includes               from left to right.
hazardous materials, look at the shipping paper.
                                                              At least three inches away from any other
                                                              markings.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-8
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Kept clear of attachments or devices such as                  You have 1,001 pounds or more of two or more
ladders, doors, and tarpaulins.                               Table 2 hazard classes, requiring different
                                                              placards, and
Kept clean and undamaged so that the color,
format, and message are easily seen.                          You have not loaded 2,205 pounds or more of any
                                                              Table 2 hazard class material at any one place.
Be affixed to a background of contrasting color.              (You must use the specific placard for this
                                                              material.)
The use of "Drive Safely" and other slogans is
prohibited.                                                   The dangerous placard is an option, not a
                                                              requirement. You can always placard for the
The front placard may be on the front of the tractor          materials.
or the front of the trailer.
                                                              If the words INHALATION HAZARD are on the
To decide which placards to use, you need to                  shipping paper or package, you must display
know:                                                         POISON GAS or POISON INHALATION placards
                                                              in addition to any other placards needed by the
The hazard class of the materials.                            product's hazard class. The 1,000 pound exception
                                                              does not apply to these materials.
The amount of hazardous materials shipped.
                                                              Materials with a secondary hazard of dangerous
The total weight of all classes of hazardous                  when wet must display the DANGEROUS WHEN
materials in your vehicle.                                    WET placard in addition to any other placards
                                                              needed by the product's hazard class. The 1,000-
9.3.11 ­ Placard Tables                                       pound exception to placarding does not apply to
                                                              these materials.
There are two placard tables, Table 1 and Table 2.
Table 1 materials must be placarded whenever any                                Placard Table 2
amount is transported. See Figure 9.7.                                      1,001 Pounds Or More

Except for bulk packaging, the hazard classes in              Category of Material (Hazard        Placard Name
Table 2 need placards only if the total amount                class or division number and
transported is 1,001 pounds or more including the                                            Explosives 1.4
package. Add the amounts from all shipping                       additional description, as  Explosives 1.5
papers for all the Table 2 products you have on                          appropriate)        Explosives 1.6
board. See Figure 9.8.                                                                       Flammable Gas
                                                              1.4 Minor Explosion            Non-Flammable Gas.
             Placard Table 1                                  1.5 Very Insensitive           Flammable
               Any Amount                                     1.6 Extremely Insensitive      Combustible*
                                                              2.1 Flammable Gases            Flammable Solid
      IF YOUR VEHICLE              PLACARD AS...              2.2 Non- Flammable Gases       Spontaneously
 CONTAINS ANY AMOUNT                                          3 Flammable Liquids            Combustible
                                Explosives 1.1                Combustible Liquid             Oxidizer
              OF......          Explosives 1.2                4.1 Flammable Solids
                                Explosives 1.3                4.2 Spontaneously
1.1 Mass Explosives             Poison Gas                    Combustible
1.2 Project Hazards             Dangerous When                5.1 Oxidizers
1.3 Mass Fire Hazards           Wet
2.3 Poisonous/Toxic Gases                                     5.2 (other than organic
                                                              peroxide, Type B, liquid or
4.3 Dangerous When Wet                                        solid, Temperature
                                                              Controlled)
                                                                                             Organic Peroxide

5.2 (Organic Peroxide, Type     Organic Peroxide
B, liquid or solid,
Temperature controlled)                                       6.1 (other than inhalation     Poison
                                                              hazard zone A or B)

6.1 (Inhalation hazard zone Poison/toxic                      6.2 Infectious Substances      (None)

A & B only)                     inhalation                    8 Corrosives                   Corrosive

7 (Radioactive Yellow III       Radioactive                   9 Miscellaneous Hazardous      Class 9**
label only)                                                   Materials

             Figure 9.7                                       ORM-D                          (None)

You may use DANGEROUS placards instead of                     * FLAMMABLE may be used in place of a
separate placards for each Table 2 hazard class               COMBUSTIBLE on a cargo tank or portable tank.
when:
                                                              ** Class 9 Placard is not required for domestic
                                                              transportation.

                                                                                       Figure 9.8

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                                                          Page 9-9
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Placards used to identify the primary or subsidiary           Many products become more hazardous when
hazard class of a material must have the hazard               exposed to heat. Load hazardous materials away
class or division number displayed in the lower               from heat sources.
corner of the placard. Permanently affixed
subsidiary hazard placards without the hazard                 Watch for signs of leaking or damaged containers:
class number may be used as long as they stay                 LEAKS SPELL TROUBLE! Do not transport
within color specifications.                                  leaking packages. Depending on the material, you,
Placards may be displayed for hazardous materials             your truck, and others could be in danger. It is
even if not required so long as the placard                   illegal to move a vehicle with leaking hazardous
identifies the hazard of the material being                   materials.
transported.
                                                              Containers of hazardous materials must be braced
Bulk packaging is a single container with a                   to prevent movement of the packages during
capacity of 119 gallons or more. A bulk package,              transportation.
and a vehicle transporting a bulk package, must be
placarded, even if it only has the residue of a               No Smoking. When loading or unloading
hazardous material. Certain bulk packages only                hazardous materials, keep fire away. Don't let
have to be placarded on the two opposite sides or             people smoke nearby. Never smoke around:
may display labels. All other bulk packages must
be placarded on all four sides.                               Class 1 (Explosives)

    Subsections 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3                             Class 2.1 (Flammable Gas )
         Test Your Knowledge
                                                              Class 3 (Flammable Liquids)
1.  Shippers package in order to (fill in the
                                                              Class 4 (Flammable Solids)
    blank) the material.
                                                              Class 5 (Oxidizers)
2.  Driver placard their vehicle to (fill in the
                                                              Secure Against Movement. Brace containers so
    blank) the risk.                                          they will not fall, slide, or bounce around during
                                                              transportation. Be very careful when loading
3.  What three things do you need to know to                  containers that have valves or other fittings. All
                                                              hazardous materials packages must be secured
    decide which placards (if any) you need?                  during transportation.

4.  A hazardous materials identification                      After loading, do not open any package during
                                                              your trip. Never transfer hazardous materials from
    number must appear on the (fill in the                    one package to another while in transit. You may
                                                              empty a cargo tank, but do not empty any other
    blank) and on the (fill in the blank). The                package while it is on the vehicle.

    identification number must also appear on                 Cargo Heater Rules. There are special cargo
                                                              heater rules for loading:
    cargo tanks and other bulk packaging.
                                                              Class 1 (Explosives)
5.  Where must you keep shipping papers
                                                              Class 2.1 (Flammable Gas )
    describing hazardous materials?
                                                              Class 3 (Flammable Liquids)
These questions may be on your test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsections 9.1, 9.2 and             The rules usually forbid use of cargo heaters,
9.3.                                                          including automatic cargo heater/air conditioner
                                                              units. Unless you have read all the related rules,
9.4 ­ Loading and Unloading                                   don't load the above products in a cargo space that
                                                              has a heater.
Do all you can to protect containers of hazardous
materials. Don't use any tools, which might                   Use Closed Cargo Space. You cannot have
damage containers or other packaging during                   overhang or tailgate loads of:
loading. Don't use hooks.
                                                              Class 1 (Explosives)
9.4.1 ­ General Loading Requirements
                                                              Class 4 (Flammable Solids)
Before loading or unloading, set the parking brake.
Make sure the vehicle will not move.                          Class 5 (Oxidizers)

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                                                                                      Page 9-10
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

You must load these hazardous materials into a                Class 4 and 5 materials must be completely
closed cargo space unless all packages are:                   enclosed in a vehicle or covered securely. Class 4
                                                              and 5 materials, which become unstable and
Fire and water resistant.                                     dangerous when wet, must be kept dry while in
                                                              transit and during loading and unloading. Materials
Covered with a fire and water resistant tarp.                 that are subject to spontaneous combustion or
                                                              heating must be in vehicles with sufficient
Precautions for Specific Hazards                              ventilation.

Class 1 (Explosives) Materials. Turn your engine              Class 8 (Corrosive) Materials. If loading by hand,
off before loading or unloading any explosives.               load breakable containers of corrosive liquid one
Then check the cargo space. You must:                         by one. Keep them right side up. Do not drop or roll
                                                              the containers. Load them onto an even floor
Disable cargo heaters. Disconnect heater power                surface. Stack carboys only if the lower tiers can
sources and drain heater fuel tanks.                          bear the weight of the upper tiers safely.

Make sure there are no sharp points that might                Do not load nitric acid above any other product.
damage cargo. Look for bolts, screws, nails,
broken side panels, and broken floorboards.                   Load charged storage batteries so their liquid won't
                                                              spill. Keep them right side up. Make sure other
Use a floor lining with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3.            cargo won't fall against or short circuit them.
The floors must be tight and the liner must be
either non-metallic material or non-ferrous metal.            Never load corrosive liquids next to or above:
(Non-ferrous metals are any metal that does not
contain iron or iron alloys).                                 Division 1.4 (Explosives C).

Use extra care to protect explosives. Never use               Division 4.1 (Flammable Solids).
hooks or other metal tools. Never drop, throw, or
roll packages. Protect explosive packages from                Division 4.3 (Dangerous When Wet).
other cargo that might cause damage.
                                                              Class 5 (Oxidizers).
Do not transfer a Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 from one
vehicle to another on a public roadway except in              Division 2.3, Zone B (Poisonous Gases).
an emergency. If safety requires an emergency
transfer, set out red warning reflectors, flags, or           Never load corrosive liquids with:
electric lanterns. You must warn others on the
road.                                                         Division 1.1 or 1.2

Never transport damaged packages of explosives.               Division 1.2 or 1.3
Do not take a package that shows any dampness
or oily stain.                                                Division 1.5 (Blasting Agents).

Do not transport Division 1.1 or 1.2 in vehicle               Division 2.3, Zone A (Poisonous Gases).
combinations if:
                                                              Division 4.2 (Spontaneously Combustible
There is a marked or placarded cargo tank in the              Materials).
combination.
                                                              Division 6.1, PGI, Zone A (Poison Liquids).
The other vehicle in the combination contains:
Division 1.1 A (Initiating Explosives).                       Class 2 (Compressed Gases) Including
Packages of Class 7 (Radioactive) materials                   Cryogenic Liquids. If your vehicle doesn't have
labeled "Yellow III."                                         racks to hold cylinders, the cargo space floor must
Division 2.3 (Poisonous Gas) or Division 6.1                  be flat. The cylinders must be:
(Poisonous) materials.
Hazardous materials in a portable tank, on a DOT              Held upright.
Spec 106A or 110A tank.
                                                              In racks attached to the vehicle or in boxes that will
Class 4 (Flammable Solids) and Class 5                        keep them from turning over.
(Oxidizers) Materials. Class 4 materials are solids
that react (including fire and explosion) to water,           Cylinders may be loaded in a horizontal position
heat, and air or even react spontaneously.                    (lying down) if it is designed so the relief valve is in
                                                              the vapor space.
Section 9 - Hazardous Material
Version: July 2014                                            Division 2.3 (Poisonous Gas) or Division 6.1
                                                              (Poisonous) Materials. Never transport these
                                                              materials in containers with interconnections.

                                                                                                                                    Page 9-11
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Never load a package labeled POISON or                        Table for Hazardous Materials) name other
POISON INHALATION HAZARD in the driver's cab                  materials you must keep apart.
or sleeper or with food material for human or
animal consumption. There are special rules for                   Subsection 9.4
loading and unloading Class 2 materials in cargo
tanks. You must have special training to do this.                 Test Your Knowledge

Class 7 (Radioactive) Materials. Some packages                1.  Around which hazard classes must you
of Class 7 (Radioactive) materials bear a number
called the "transport index." The shipper labels                  never smoke?
these packages Radioactive II or Radioactive III,
and prints the package's transport index on the               2.  Which three hazard classes should not be
label. Radiation surrounds each package, passing
through all nearby packages. To deal with this                    loaded into a trailer that has a heater/air
problem, the number of packages you can load
together is controlled. Their closeness to people,                conditioner unit?
animals, and unexposed film is also controlled. The
transport index tells the degree of control needed            3.  Should the floor liner required for Division
during transportation. The total transport index of
all packages in a single vehicle must not exceed                  1.1 or 1.2 materials be stainless steel?
50.Table A to this section shows rules for each
transport index. It shows how close you can load              4.  At the shipper's dock you're given a paper
Class 7 (Radioactive) materials to people, animals,
or film. For example, you can't leave a package                   for 100 cartons of battery acid. You
with a transport index of 1.1 within two feet of
people or cargo space walls.                                      already have 100 pounds of dry Silver

                                                                  Cyanide on board. What precautions do

                                                                  you have to take?

                                                              5.  Name a hazard class that uses transport

                                                                  indexes to determine the amount that can

                                                                  be loaded in a single vehicle.

                    Do Not Load Table                         These questions may be on your test. If you can't
                                                              answer them all, re-read subsection 9.4.

Do Not Load          In The Same Vehicle With

                     Animal or human food unless the

Division 6.1 or 2.3  poison package is over packed in

(POISON or poison    an approved way. Foodstuffs are

inhalation hazard    anything you swallow. However,           9.5 ­ Bulk Packaging Marking, Loading
                                                              and Unloading
labeled material).   mouthwash, toothpaste, and skin
                                                              The glossary at the end of this section gives the
                     creams are not foodstuff.                meaning of the word bulk. Cargo tanks are bulk
                                                              packaging permanently attached to a vehicle.
                     Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Explosives,       Cargo tanks remain on the vehicle when you load
                                                              and unload them. Portable tanks are bulk
                     Division 5.1 (Oxidizers), Class 3        packaging, which are not permanently attached to
                                                              a vehicle. The product is loaded or unloaded while
Division 2.3         (Flammable Liquids), Class 8             the portable tanks are off the vehicle. Portable
                                                              tanks are then put on a vehicle for transportation.
(Poisonous) gas Zone (Corrosive Liquids), Division 5.2        There are many types of cargo tanks in use. The
                                                              most common cargo tanks are MC306 for liquids
A or Division 6.1    (Organic Peroxides),                     and MC331 for gases.

(Poison) liquids, PGI, Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Explosives,     9.5.1 ­ Markings

Zone A.              Division 1.5 (Blasting Agents),          You must display the identification number of the
                                                              hazardous materials in portable tanks and cargo
                     Division 2.1 (Flammable Gases),          tanks and other bulk packaging (such as dump
                                                              trucks). Identification numbers are in column 4 of
                     Class 4 (Flammable Solids).              the Hazardous Materials Table. The rules require
                                                              black 100 mm (3.9 inch) numbers on orange
Charged storage      Division 1.1.                            panels, placards, or a white, diamond-shaped
batteries.                                                    background if no placards are required.
                                                              Specification cargo tanks must show re-test date
Class 1 (Detonating  Any other explosives unless in           markings.
primers).            authorized containers or
                     packages.                                                                                                      Page 9-12

                     Acids, corrosive materials, or other

                     acidic materials which could

Division 6.1         release hydrocyanic acid.

(Cyanides or cyanide For Example:

mixtures).           Cyanides, Inorganic, n.o.s.

                     Silver Cyanide

                     Sodium Cyanide.

                     Other materials unless the nitric

Nitric acid (Class 8). acid is not loaded above any other

                     material.

                     Figure 9.9

Mixed loads. The rules require some products to
be loaded separately. You cannot load them
together in the same cargo space. Figure 9.9 lists
some examples. The regulations (the Segregation

Section 9 - Hazardous Material
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Portable tanks must also show the lessee or                   letters of the shipping name must be at least two
owner's name. They must also display the shipping             inches tall on portable tanks with capacities of
name of the contents on two opposing sides. The               more than 1,000 gallons and one-inch tall on
                                                              portable tanks with capacities of less than 1,000
                                                              gallons. The identification number must appear on
                                                              each side and each end of a portable tank or other
                                                              bulk packaging that hold 1,000 gallons or more
                                                              and on two opposing sides, if the portable tank
                                                              holds less than 1,000 gallons. The identification
                                                              numbers must still be visible when the portable
                                                              tank is on the motor vehicle. If they are not visible,
                                                              you must display the identification number on both
                                                              sides and ends of the motor vehicle.

                                                              Intermediate bulk containers (IBCs) are bulk
                                                              packages, but are not required to have the owner's
                                                              name or shipping name.

                                                              9.5.2 ­ Tank Loading

                                                              The person in charge of loading and unloading a
                                                              cargo tank must be sure a qualified person is
                                                              always watching. This person watching the loading
                                                              or unloading must:

                                                              Be alert.

                                                              Have a clear view of the cargo tank.

                                                              Be within 25 feet of the tank.

                                                              Know of the hazards of the materials involved.

                                                              Know the procedures to follow in an emergency.

                                                              Be authorized to move the cargo tank and able to
                                                              do so.

                                                              There are special attendance rules for cargo tanks
                                                              transporting propane and anhydrous ammonia.

                                                              Close all manholes and valves before moving a
                                                              tank of hazardous materials, no matter how small
                                                              the amount in the tank or how short the distance.
                                                              Manholes and valves must be closed to prevent
                                                              leaks. It is illegal to move a cargo tank with open
                                                              valves or covers unless it is empty according to 49
                                                              CFR 173.29.

                                                              9.5.3 ­ Flammable Liquids

                                                              Turn off your engine before loading or unloading
                                                              any flammable liquids. Only run the engine if
                                                              needed to operate a pump. Ground a cargo tank
                                                              correctly before filling it through an open filling
                                                              hole. Ground the tank before opening the filling
                                                              hole, and maintain the ground until after closing
                                                              the filling hole.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                                           Page 9-13
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

9.5.4 ­ Compressed Gas                                        You are allowed to leave your vehicle unattended
                                                              in a safe haven. A safe haven is an approved
Keep liquid discharge valves on a compressed gas              place for parking unattended vehicles loaded with
tank closed except when loading and unloading.                explosives. Designation of authorized safe havens
Unless your engine runs a pump for product                    is usually made by local authorities.
transfer, turn it off when loading or unloading. If
you use the engine, turn it off after product                 9.6.2 ­ Parking a Placarded Vehicle Not
transfer, before you unhook the hose. Unhook all              Transporting Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3)
loading/unloading connections before coupling,                Explosives
uncoupling, or moving a cargo tank. Always chock
trailers and semi-trailers to prevent motion when             You may park a placarded vehicle (not laden with
uncoupled from the power unit.                                explosives) within five feet of the traveled part of
                                                              the road only if your work requires it. Do so only
                 Subsection 9.5                               briefly. Someone must always watch the vehicle
             Test Your Knowledge                              when parked on a public roadway or shoulder. Do
                                                              not uncouple a trailer and leave it with hazardous
1. What are cargo tanks?                                      materials on a public street. Do not park within 300
2. How is a portable tank different from a cargo              feet of an open fire.

     tank?                                                    9.6.3 ­ Attending Parked Vehicles
3. Your engine runs a pump used during delivery
                                                              The person attending a placarded vehicle must:
     of compressed gas. Should you turn off the
     engine before or after unhooking hoses after             Be in the vehicle, awake, and not in the sleeper
     delivery?                                                berth, or within 100 feet of the vehicle and have it
                                                              within clear view.
These questions may be on your test. If you can't
answer them all, re-read subsection 9.5.                      Be aware of the hazards of the materials being
                                                              transported.
9.6 ­ Hazardous Materials -- Driving
and Parking Rules                                             Know what to do in emergencies.

9.6.1 ­ Parking with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3                Be able to move the vehicle, if needed.
Explosives
                                                              9.6.4 ­ No Flares!
Never park with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives
within five feet of the traveled part of the road.            You might break down and have to use stopped
Except for short periods of time needed for vehicle           vehicle signals. Use reflective triangles or red
operation necessities (e.g., fueling), do not park            electric lights. Never use burning signals, such as
within 300 feet of:                                           flares or fuses, around a:
A bridge, tunnel, or building.
A place where people gather.                                  Tank used for Class 3 (Flammable Liquids) or
An open fire.                                                 Division 2.1 (Flammable Gas) whether loaded or
If you must park to do your job, do so only briefly.          empty.
Don't park on private property unless the owner is
aware of the danger. Someone must always watch                Vehicle loaded with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3
the parked vehicle. You may let someone else                  Explosives.
watch it for you only if your vehicle is:
On the shipper's property.                                    9.6.5 ­ Route Restrictions
On the carrier's property.
On the consignee's property.                                  Some states and counties require permits to
                                                              transport hazardous materials or wastes. They
Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                may limit the routes you can use. Local rules about
Version: July 2014                                            routes and permits change often. It is your job as
                                                              driver to find out if you need permits or must use
                                                              special routes. Make sure you have all needed
                                                              papers before starting.

                                                              If you work for a carrier, ask your dispatcher about
                                                              route restrictions or permits. If you are an
                                                              independent trucker and are planning a new route,
                                                              check with state agencies where you plan to travel.
                                                              Some localities prohibit transportation of

                                                                                                                                    Page 9-14
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

hazardous materials through tunnels, over bridges,            The only acceptable way to check tire pressure is
or other roadways. Always check before you start.             to use a tire pressure gauge.

Whenever placarded, avoid heavily populated                   Do not drive with a tire that is leaking or flat except
areas, crowds, tunnels, narrow streets, and alleys.           to the nearest safe place to fix it. Remove any
Take other routes, even if inconvenient, unless               overheated tire. Place it a safe distance from your
there is no other way. Never drive a placarded                vehicle. Don't drive until you correct the cause of
vehicle near open fires unless you can safely pass            the overheating. Remember to follow the rules
without stopping.                                             about parking and attending placarded vehicles.
                                                              They apply even when checking, repairing, or
If transporting Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives,         replacing tires.
you must have a written route plan and follow that
plan. Carriers prepare the route plan in advance              9.6.10 ­ Where to Keep Shipping Papers and
and give the driver a copy. You may plan the route            Emergency Response Information
yourself if you pick up the explosives at a location
other than your employer's terminal. Write out the            Do not accept a hazardous materials shipment
plan in advance. Keep a copy of it with you while             without a properly prepared shipping paper. A
transporting the explosives. Deliver shipments of             shipping paper for hazardous materials must
explosives only to authorized persons or leave                always be easily recognized. Other people must be
them in locked rooms designed for explosives                  able to find it quickly after a crash.
storage.
                                                              Clearly distinguish hazardous materials shipping
A carrier must choose the safest route to transport           papers from others by tabbing them or keeping
placarded radioactive materials. After choosing the           them on top of the stack of papers.
route, the carrier must tell the driver about the
radioactive materials, and show the route plan.               When you are behind the wheel, keep shipping
                                                              papers within your reach (with your seat belt on),
9.6.6 ­ No Smoking                                            or in a pouch on the driver's door. They must be
                                                              easily seen by someone entering the cab.
Do not smoke within 25 feet of a placarded cargo
tank used for Class 3 (flammable liquids) or                  When not behind the wheel, leave shipping papers
Division 2.1 (gases). Also, do not smoke or carry a           in the driver's door pouch or on the driver's seat.
lighted cigarette, cigar, or pipe within 25 feet of any
vehicle, which contains:                                      Emergency response information must be kept in
                                                              the same location as the shipping paper.
Class 1 (Explosives)
                                                              Papers for Division 1.1, 1.2 or, 1.3 Explosives.
Class 3 (Flammable Liquids)
                                                              A carrier must give each driver transporting
Class 4 (Flammable Solids)                                    Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives a copy of
                                                              Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations
Class 4.2 (Spontaneously Combustible)                         (FMCSR), Part 397. The carrier must also give
                                                              written instructions on what to do if delayed or in
9.6.7 ­ Refuel with Engine Off                                an accident. The written instructions must include:

Turn off your engine before fueling a motor vehicle           The names and telephone numbers of people to
containing hazardous materials. Someone must                  contact (including carrier agents or shippers).
always be at the nozzle, controlling fuel flow.
                                                              The nature of the explosives transported.
9.6.8 ­ 10 B C Fire Extinguisher
                                                              The precautions to take in emergencies such as
The power unit of placarded vehicles must have a              fires, accidents, or leaks.
fire extinguisher with a UL rating of 10 B:C or
more.                                                         Drivers must sign a receipt for these documents.
                                                              You must be familiar with, and have in your
9.6.9 ­ Check Tires                                           possession while driving, the:

Make sure your tires are properly inflated.                   Shipping papers.

You must examine each tire on a motor vehicle at              Written emergency instructions.
the beginning of each trip and each time the
vehicle is parked.                                            Written route plan.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                A copy of FMCSR, Part 397.
Version: July 2014
                                                                                                                                    Page 9-15
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

9.6.11 ­ Equipment for Chlorine                               Call for help.

A driver transporting chlorine in cargo tanks must            Follow your employer's instructions.
have an approved gas mask in the vehicle. The
driver must also have an emergency kit for                    9.7.3 ­ Fires
controlling leaks in dome cover plate fittings on the
cargo tank.                                                   You might have to control minor truck fires on the
                                                              road. However, unless you have the training and
9.6.12 ­ Stop before Railroad Crossings                       equipment to do so safely, don't fight hazardous
                                                              materials fires. Dealing with hazardous materials
Stop before a railroad crossing if your vehicle:              fires requires special training and protective gear.

Is placarded.                                                 When you discover a fire, call for help. You may
                                                              use the fire extinguisher to keep minor truck fires
Carries any amount of chlorine.                               from spreading to cargo before firefighters arrive.
                                                              Feel trailer doors to see if they are hot before
Has cargo tanks, whether loaded or empty used for             opening them. If hot, you may have a cargo fire
hazardous materials.                                          and should not open the doors. Opening doors lets
                                                              air in and may make the fire flare up. Without air,
You must stop 15 to 50 feet before the nearest rail.          many fires only smolder until firemen arrive, doing
Proceed only when you are sure no train is coming             less damage. If your cargo is already on fire, it is
and you can clear the tracks without stopping.                not safe to fight the fire. Keep the shipping papers
Don't shift gears while crossing the tracks.                  with you to give to emergency personnel as soon
                                                              as they arrive. Warn other people of the danger
9.7 ­ Hazardous Materials -                                   and keep them away.
Emergencies
                                                              If you discover a cargo leak, identify the hazardous
9.7.1 ­ Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG)                    materials leaking by using shipping papers, labels,
                                                              or package location. Do not touch any leaking
The Department of Transportation has a                        material--many people injure themselves by
guidebook for firefighters, police, and industry              touching hazardous materials. Do not try to identify
workers on how to protect themselves and the                  the material or find the source of a leak by smell.
public from hazardous materials. The guide is                 Toxic gases can destroy your sense of smell and
indexed by proper shipping name and hazardous                 can injure or kill you even if they don't smell. Never
materials identification number. Emergency                    eat, drink, or smoke around a leak or spill.
personnel look for these things on the shipping
paper. That is why it is vital that the proper                If hazardous materials are spilling from your
shipping name, identification number, label, and              vehicle, do not move it any more than safety
placards are correct.                                         requires. You may move off the road and away
                                                              from places where people gather, if doing so
9.7.2 ­ Crashes/Incidents                                     serves safety. Only move your vehicle if you can
                                                              do so without danger to yourself or others.
As a professional driver, your job at the scene of a
crash or an incident is to:                                   Never continue driving with hazardous materials
                                                              leaking from your vehicle in order to find a phone
Keep people away from the scene.                              booth, truck stop, help, or similar reason.
                                                              Remember, the carrier pays for the cleanup of
Limit the spread of material, only if you can safely          contaminated parking lots, roadways, and drainage
do so.                                                        ditches. The costs are enormous, so don't leave a
                                                              lengthy trail of contamination. If hazardous
Communicate the danger of the hazardous                       materials are spilling from your vehicle:
materials to emergency response personnel.
                                                              Park it.
Provide emergency responders with the shipping
papers and emergency response information.                    Secure the area.

Follow this checklist:                                        Stay there.

Check to see that your driving partner is OK.                 Send someone else for help.

Keep shipping papers with you.                                When sending someone for help, give that person:

Keep people far away and upwind.                              A description of the emergency.

Warn others of the danger.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-16
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Your exact location and direction of travel.                  if you can do so safely. Don't transfer flammable
                                                              liquid from one vehicle to another on a public
Your name, the carrier's name, and the name of                roadway except in an emergency.
the community or city where your terminal is
located.                                                      Class 4 (Flammable Solids) and Class 5
                                                              (Oxidizing Materials). If a flammable solid or
The proper shipping name, hazard class, and                   oxidizing material spills, warn others of the fire
identification number of the hazardous materials, if          hazard. Do not open smoldering packages of
you know them.                                                flammable solids. Remove them from the vehicle if
                                                              you can safely do so. Also, remove unbroken
This is a lot for someone to remember. It is a good           packages if it will decrease the fire hazard.
idea to write it all down for the person you send for
help. The emergency response team must know                   Class 6 (Poisonous Materials and Infectious
these things to find you and to handle the                    Substances). It is your job to protect yourself,
emergency. They may have to travel miles to get to            other people, and property from harm. Remember
you. This information will help them to bring the             that many products classed as poison are also
right equipment the first time, without having to go          flammable. If you think a Division 2.3 (Poison
back for it.                                                  Gases) or Division 6.1 (Poison Materials) might be
                                                              flammable, take the added precautions needed for
Never move your vehicle, if doing so will cause               flammable liquids or gases. Do not allow smoking,
contamination or damage the vehicle. Keep                     open flame, or welding. Warn others of the hazards
upwind and away from roadside rests, truck stops,             of fire, of inhaling vapors, or coming in contact with
cafes, and businesses. Never try to repack leaking            the poison.
containers. Unless you have the training and
equipment to repair leaks safely, don't try it. Call          A vehicle involved in a leak of Division 2.3 (Poison
your dispatcher or supervisor for instructions and, if        Gases) or Division 6.1 (Poisons) must be checked
needed, emergency personnel.                                  for stray poison before being used again.

9.7.4 ­ Responses to Specific Hazards                         If a Division 6.2 (Infectious Substances) package is
                                                              damaged in handling or transportation, you should
Class 1 (Explosives). If your vehicle has a                   immediately contact your supervisor. Packages
breakdown or accident while carrying explosives,              that appear to be damaged or show signs of
warn others of the danger. Keep bystanders away.              leakage should not be accepted.
Do not allow smoking or open fire near the vehicle.
If there is a fire, warn every one of the danger of           Class 7 (Radioactive Materials). If radioactive
explosion.                                                    material is involved in a leak or broken package,
                                                              tell your dispatcher or supervisor as soon as
Remove all explosives before separating vehicles              possible. If there is a spill, or if an internal
involved in a collision. Place the explosives at least        container might be damaged, do not touch or
200 feet from the vehicles and occupied buildings.            inhale the material. Do not use the vehicle until it is
Stay a safe distance away.                                    cleaned and checked with a survey meter.

Class 2 (Compressed Gases). If compressed gas                 Class 8 (Corrosive Materials). If corrosives spill
is leaking from your vehicle, warn others of the              or leak during transportation, be careful to avoid
danger. Only permit those involved in removing the            further damage or injury when handling the
hazard or wreckage to get close. You must notify              containers. Parts of the vehicle exposed to a
the shipper if compressed gas is involved in any              corrosive liquid must be thoroughly washed with
accident.                                                     water. After unloading, wash out the interior as
                                                              soon as possible before reloading.
Unless you are fueling machinery used in road
construction or maintenance, do not transfer a                If continuing to transport a leaking tank would be
flammable compressed gas from one tank to                     unsafe, get off the road. If safe to do so, contain
another on any public roadway.                                any liquid leaking from the vehicle. Keep
                                                              bystanders away from the liquid and its fumes. Do
Class 3 (Flammable Liquids). If you are                       everything possible to prevent injury to yourself
transporting a flammable liquid and have an                   and to others.
accident or your vehicle breaks down, prevent
bystanders from gathering. Warn people of the                                                                                       Page 9-17
danger. Keep them from smoking.
Never transport a leaking cargo tank farther than
needed to reach a safe place. Get off the roadway

Section 9 - Hazardous Material
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

9.7.5 ­ Required Notification                                 CHEMTREC

The National Response Center helps coordinate                 (800) 424-9300
emergency response to chemical hazards. It is a
resource to the police and firefighters. It maintains         The Chemical Transportation Emergency Center
a 24-hour toll-free line listed below. You or your            (CHEMTREC) in Washington also has a 24-hour
employer must phone when any of the following                 toll-free line. CHEMTREC was created to provide
occur as a direct result of a hazardous materials             emergency personnel with technical information
incident:                                                     about the physical properties of hazardous
                                                              materials. The National Response Center and
A person is killed.                                           CHEMTREC are in close communication. If you
                                                              call either one, they will tell the other about the
An injured person requires hospitalization.                   problem when appropriate.

Estimated property damage exceeds $50,000.                    Do not leave radioactive yellow - II or yellow - III
                                                              labeled packages near people, animals, or film
The general public is evacuated for more than one             longer than shown in Figure 9.10
hour.

One or more major transportation arteries or
facilities are closed for one hour or more.

Fire, breakage, spillage, or suspected radioactive
contamination occurs.

Fire, breakage, spillage or suspected
contamination occur involving shipment of etiologic
agents (bacteria or toxins).

A situation exists of such a nature (e.g., continuing
danger to life exists at the scene of an incident)
that, in the judgment of the carrier, should be
reported.

National Response Center
(800) 424-8802

Persons telephoning the National Response
Center should be ready to give:

Their name.

Name and address of the carrier they work for.

Phone number where they can be reached.

Date, time, and location of incident.

The extent of injuries, if any.

Classification, name, and quantity of hazardous
materials involved, if such information is available.

Type of incident and nature of hazardous materials
involvement and whether a continuing danger to
life exists at the scene.

If a reportable quantity of hazardous substance
was involved, the caller should give the name of
the shipper and the quantity of the hazardous
substance discharged.

Be prepared to give your employer the required
information as well. Carriers must make detailed
written reports within 30 days of an incident.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-18
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

               Radioactive Separation                                Hazard Class Definitions
                           Table A
                                                                                Table B
           MINIMUM DISTANCE IN FEET TO
TRANSPORT  NEAREST UNDEVELOPED FILM     TO PEOPLE OR CARGO    Class  Class Name          Example
                                           COMPARTMENT        1
                                               PARTITIONS     2                          Ammunition,
                                                              3
                                                              4      Explosives          Dynamite,
                                                              5
                                                              6                          Fireworks
                                                              7
                                                              8      Gases               Propane,
                                                              9                          Oxygen, Helium

TOTA L     0-2 2-4 4-8 8-12 Over 12                           None   Flammable           Gasoline Fuel,
   INDEX   Hrs. Hrs. Hrs. Hrs. Hrs.                                                      Acetone
                                                              None
                                                                     Flammable           Matches, Fuses
                                                                     Solids
None 0        0  0              0  0    0
                                                                                         Ammonium
0.1 to
1.0        1  2  3              4  5    1                            Oxidizers           Nitrate, Hydrogen

1.1 to                                                                                   Peroxide
5.0
           3  4  6              8  11   2                                                Pesticides,
                                                                                         Arsenic
5.1 to                                                               Poisons
10.0
           4  6  9              11 15   3                                                Uranium,
                                                                                         Plutonium
10.1 to    5  8  12 16 22               4                            Radioactive
20.0
                                                                                         Hydrochloric
20.1 to    7  10 15 20 29               5                            Corrosives          Acid, Battery Acid
30.0

30.1 to    8  11 17 22 33               6                            Miscellaneous       Formaldehyde,
40.0                                                                 Hazardous           Asbestos
                                                                     Materials
40.1 to    9  12 19 24 36
50.0
                                                                     ORM-D (Other

                 Figure 9.10                                         Regulated           Hair Spray or

                                                                     Material-           Charcoal

                                                                     Domestic)

Classes of Hazardous Materials                                       Combustible         Fuel Oils, Lighter

Hazardous materials are categorized into nine                        Liquids             Fluid
major hazard classes and additional categories for
consumer commodities and combustible liquids.                                 Figure 9.11
The classes of hazardous materials are listed in
Figure 9.11.                                                             Subsections 9.6 and 9.7
                                                                           Test Your Knowledge

                                                              1. If your placarded trailer has dual tires, how
                                                                      often should you check the tires?

                                                              2. What is a safe haven?

                                                              3. How close to the traveled part of the
                                                                      roadway can you park with Division 1.2 or
                                                                      1.3 materials?

                                                              4. How close can you park to a bridge, tunnel,
                                                                      or building with the same load?

                                                              5. What type of fire extinguisher must
                                                                      placarded vehicles carry?

                                                              6. You're hauling 100 pounds of Division 4.3
                                                                      (dangerous when wet) materials. Do you
                                                                      need to stop before a railroad-highway
                                                                      crossing?

                                                              7. At a rest area you discover your hazardous
                                                                      materials shipments slowly leaking from the
                                                                      vehicle. There is no phone around. What
                                                                      should you do?

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                                                        Page 9-19
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

8. What is the Emergency Response Guide                       Consignee ­ The business or person to whom a
        (ERG)?                                                shipment is delivered.

These questions may be on your test. If you can't             Division ­ A subdivision of a hazard class.
answer them all, re-read subsections 9.6 and 9.7.

                                                              EPA ­ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

9.8 ­ Hazardous Materials Glossary                            FMCSR ­ The Federal Motor Carrier Safety
                                                              Regulations.
This glossary presents definitions of certain terms
used in this section. A complete glossary of terms            Freight container ­ a reusable container having a
can be found in the federal Hazardous Materials               volume of 64 cubic feet or more, designed and
Rules (49 CFR 171.8). You should have an up-to-               constructed to permit being lifted with its contents
date copy of these rules for your reference.                  intact and intended primarily for containment of
                                                              packages (in unit form) during transportation.
(Note: You will not be tested on this glossary.)
                                                              Fuel tank ­ A tank, other than a cargo tank, used
Sec. 171.8 Definitions and abbreviations.                     to transport flammable or combustible liquid or
                                                              compressed gas for the purpose of supplying fuel
Bulk packaging ­ Packaging, other than a vessel,              for propulsion of the transport vehicle to which it is
or a barge, including a transport vehicle or freight          attached, or for the operation of other equipment
container, in which hazardous materials are loaded            on the transport vehicle.
with no intermediate form of containment and
which has:                                                    Gross weight or gross mass ­ The weight of the
                                                              packaging plus the weight of its contents.
A maximum capacity greater than 450 L (119
gallons) as a receptacle for a liquid;                        Hazard class ­ The category of hazard assigned
                                                              to a hazardous material under the definitional
A maximum net mass greater than 400 kg (882                   criteria of Part 173 and the provisions of the Sec.
pounds) or a maximum capacity greater than 450 L              172.101 Table. A material may meet the defining
(119 gallons) as a receptacle for a solid; or                 criteria for more than one hazard class but is
                                                              assigned to only one hazard class.
A water capacity greater than 454 kg (1000
pounds) as a receptacle for a gas as defined in               Hazardous materials ­ A substance or material
Sec. 173.115.                                                 which has been determined by the Secretary of
                                                              Transportation to be capable of posing an
Cargo tank - A bulk packaging which:                          unreasonable risk to health, safety, and property
                                                              when transported in commerce, and which has
Is a tank intended primarily for the carriage of              been so designated. The term includes hazardous
liquids or gases and includes appurtenances,                  substances, hazardous wastes, marine pollutants,
reinforcements, fittings, and closures (for "tank",           elevated temperature materials and materials
see 49 CFR 178.345-1(c), 178.337-1, or                        designated as hazardous in the hazardous
178.338-1, as applicable);                                    materials table of §172.101, and materials that
                                                              meet the defining criteria for hazard classes and
Is permanently attached to or forms a part of a               divisions in §173, subchapter c of this chapter.
motor vehicle, or is not permanently attached to a
motor vehicle but which, by reason of its size,               Hazardous substance - A material, including its
construction, or attachment to a motor vehicle is             mixtures and solutions, that:
loaded or unloaded without being removed from
the motor vehicle; and                                        Is listed in Appendix A to Sec. 172.101;

Is not fabricated under a specification for cylinders,        Is in a quantity, in one package, which equals or
portable tanks, tank cars, or multi-unit tank car             exceeds the reportable quantity (RQ) listed in
tanks.                                                        Appendix A to Sec. 172.101; and

Carrier ­ A person engaged in the transportation              When in a mixture or solution -
of passengers or property by:
                                                              For radionuclides, conforms to paragraph 7 of
Land or water as a common, contract, or private               Appendix A to Sec. 172.101.
carrier, or

Civil aircraft.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-20
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

For other than radionuclides, is in a concentration           A water capacity greater than 454 kg (1,000
by weight which equals or exceeds the                         pounds) or less as a receptacle for a gas as
concentration corresponding to the RQ of the                  defined in Sec. 173.115.
material, as shown in Figure 9.12.

                                                              N.O.S. - Not otherwise specified.

Hazardous Substance Concentrations

RQ Pounds Concentration by Weight                             Outage or ullage ­ The amount by which a
                                                              packaging falls short of being liquid full, usually
(Kilograms Percent              PPM                           expressed in percent by volume.

5,000      10                   100,000                       Portable tank ­ Bulk packaging (except a cylinder
                                                              having a water capacity of 1,000 pounds or less)
(2,270)                         20,000                        designed primarily to be loaded onto, or on, or
                                2,000                         temporarily attached to a transport vehicle or ship
1,000 (454) 2                   200                           and equipped with skids, mountings, or
                                20                            accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by
100 (45.4) .2                                                 mechanical means. It does not include a cargo
                                                              tank, tank car, multi-unit tank car tank, or trailer
10 (4.54)  .02                                                carrying 3AX, 3AAX, or 3T cylinders.

1 (0.454)  .002

               Figure 9.12

This definition does not apply to petroleum                   Proper shipping name ­ The name of the
products that are lubricants or fuels (see 40 CFR             hazardous materials shown in Roman print (not
300.6).                                                       italics) in Sec. 172.101.

Hazardous waste ­ For the purposes of this                    P.s.i. or psi ­ Pounds per square inch.
chapter, means any material that is subject to the
Hazardous Waste Manifest Requirements of the                  P.s.i.a. or psia ­ Pounds per square inch
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency specified in             absolute.
40 CFR Part 262.

Intermediate bulk container (IBC) ­ A rigid or                Reportable quantity (RQ) - The quantity specified
flexible portable packaging, other than a cylinder or         in Column 2 of the Appendix to Sec. 172.101 for
portable tank, which is designed for mechanical               any material identified in Column 1 of the
handling. Standards for IBCs manufactured in the              Appendix.
United States are set forth in subparts N and O
§178.

Limited quantity ­ The maximum amount of a                    RSPA ­ now PHMSA ­ The Pipeline and
hazardous material for which there may be specific            Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, U.S.
labeling or packaging exception.                              Department of Transportation, Washington, DC
                                                              20590.

Marking ­ The descriptive name, identification                Shipper's certification ­ A statement on a
number, instructions, cautions, weight,                       shipping paper, signed by the shipper, saying
specification, or UN marks or combinations thereof,           he/she prepared the shipment properly according
required by this subchapter on outer packaging of             to law. For example:
hazardous materials.
                                                              "This is to certify that the above named materials
Mixture ­ A material composed of more than one                are properly classified, described, packaged,
chemical compound or element.                                 marked and labeled, and are in proper condition
                                                              for transportation according to the applicable
Name of contents ­ The proper shipping name as                regulations or the Department of Transportation.";
specified in Sec. 172.101.                                    or

                                                              I hereby declare that the contents of this

Non-bulk packaging - A packaging, which has:                  consignment are fully and accurately described

A maximum capacity of 450 L (119 gallons) as a                above by the proper shipping name and are
receptacle for a liquid;
                                                              classified,  packaged,             marked  and
A maximum net mass less than 400 kg (882
pounds) and a maximum capacity of 450 L (119                  labeled/placarded, and are in all respects in proper
gallons) or less as a receptacle for a solid; or
                                                              condition for transport by * according to applicable

                                                              international and national government regulations."

                                                              * words may be inserted here to indicate mode of
                                                              transportation (rail, aircraft, motor vehicle, vessel)

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                                                           Page 9-21
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Shipping paper ­ A shipping order, bill of lading,
manifest, or other shipping document serving a
similar purpose and containing the information
required by Sec. 172.202, 172.203, and 172.204.

Technical name ­ A recognized chemical name or
microbiological name currently used in scientific
and technical handbooks, journals, and texts.

Transport vehicle ­ A cargo-carrying vehicle such
as an automobile, van, tractor, truck, semi-trailer,
tank car, or rail car used for the transportation of
cargo by any mode. Each cargo-carrying body
(trailer, rail car, etc.) is a separate transport
vehicle.

UN standard packaging ­ A specification
packaging conforming to the standards in the UN
recommendations.

UN ­ United Nations.

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-22
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

               THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Section 9 - Hazardous Material                                Page 9-23
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 10
      SCHOOL BUSES

This Section Covers

 Danger Zones and Use of Mirrors                                                        Figure 10.1
 Loading and Unloading
 Emergency Exit and Evacuation                                10.1.3 ­ Outside Left and Right Side Flat
 Railroad-highway Grade Crossings                             Mirrors
 Student Management
 Antilock Braking Systems                                     These mirrors are mounted at the left and right
 Special Safety Considerations                                front corners of the bus at the side or front of the
                                                              windshield. They are used to monitor traffic, check
Because state and local laws and regulations                  clearances and students on the sides and to the
regulate so much of school transportation and                 rear of the bus. There is a blind spot immediately
school bus operations, many of the procedures in              below and in front of each mirror and directly in
this section may differ from state to state. You              back of the rear bumper. The blind spot behind the
should be thoroughly familiar with the laws and               bus extends 5o to 150 feet and could extend up to
regulations in your state and local school district.          400 feet depending on the length and width of the
                                                              bus.
10.1 ­ Danger Zones and Use of Mirrors
                                                              Ensure that the mirrors are properly adjusted so
10.1.1 ­ Danger Zones                                         you can see:

The danger zone is the area on all sides of the bus           200 feet or 4 bus lengths behind the bus.
where children are in the most danger of being hit,
either by another vehicle or their own bus. The               Along the sides of the bus.
danger zones may extend as much as 30 feet from
the front bumper with the first 10 feet being the             The rear tires touching the ground.
most dangerous, 10 feet from the left and right
sides of the bus and 10 feet behind the rear                  Figure 10.2 shows how both the outside left and
bumper of the school bus. In addition, the area to            right side flat mirrors should be adjusted.
the left of the bus is always considered dangerous
because of passing cars. Figure 10.1 illustrates
these danger zones.

10.1.2 ­ Correct Mirror Adjustment

Proper adjustment and use of all mirrors is vital to
the safe operation of the school bus in order to
observe the danger zone around the bus and look
for students, traffic, and other objects in this area.
You should always check each mirror before
operating the school bus to obtain maximum
viewing area. If necessary, have the mirrors
adjusted.

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     Page 10-1
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                          Figure 10.2                                                   Figure 10.3

10.1.4 ­ Outside Left and Right Side Convex                   right side of the bus, including the service door and
Mirrors                                                       front wheel area. The mirror presents a view of
                                                              people and objects that does not accurately reflect
The convex mirrors are located below the outside              their size and distance from the bus. The driver
flat mirrors. They are used to monitor the left and           must ensure that these mirrors are properly
right sides at a wide angle. They provide a view of           adjusted.
traffic, clearances, and students at the side of the
bus. These mirrors present a view of people and               Ensure that the mirrors are properly adjusted so
objects that does not accurately reflect their size           you can see:
and distance from the bus.                                    The entire area in front of the bus from the front
                                                              bumper at ground level to a point where direct
You should position these mirrors to see:                     vision is possible. Direct vision and mirror view
                                                              vision should overlap.
The entire side of the bus up to the mirror mounts.           The right and left front tires touching the ground.
                                                              The area from the front of the bus to the service
Front of the rear tires touching the ground.                  door.
                                                              These mirrors, along with the convex and flat
At least one traffic lane on either side of the bus.          mirrors, should be viewed in a logical sequence to
                                                              ensure that a child or object is not in any of the
Figure 10.3 shows how both the outside left and               danger zones.
right side convex mirrors should be adjusted.
                                                              Figure 10.4 illustrates how the left and right side
10.1.5 ­ Outside Left and Right Side Crossover                crossover mirrors should be adjusted.
Mirrors

These mirrors are mounted on both left and right
front corners of the bus. They are used to see the
front bumper "danger zone" area directly in front of
the bus that is not visible by direct vision, and to
view the "danger zone" area to the left side and the

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     Page 10-2
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                                                               the state laws and regulations governing
                                                                               loading/unloading operations in your state.

                          Figure 10.4                   Page 10-3

10.1.6 ­ Overhead Inside Rearview Mirror

This mirror is mounted directly above the
windshield on the driver's side area of the bus.
This mirror is used to monitor passenger activity
inside the bus. It may provide limited visibility
directly in back of the bus if the bus is equipped
with a glass-bottomed rear emergency door. There
is a blind spot area directly behind the driver's seat
as well as a large blind spot area that begins at the
rear bumper and could extend up to 400 feet or
more behind the bus. You must use the exterior
side mirrors to monitor traffic that approaches and
enters this area.

You should position the mirror to see:

The top of the rear window in the top of the mirror.

All of the students, including the heads of the
students right behind you.

10.2 ­ Loading and Unloading

More students are killed while getting on or off a
school bus each year than are killed as
passengers inside of a school bus. As a result,
knowing what to do before, during, and after
loading or unloading students is critical. This
section will give you specific procedures to help
you avoid unsafe conditions which could result in
injuries and fatalities during and after loading and
unloading students.

The information in this section is intended to
provide a broad overview, but is not a definitive set
of actions. It is imperative that you learn and obey

Section 10 ­ School Buses
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

10.2.1 ­ Approaching the Stop                                 10.2.2 ­ Loading Procedures

Each school district establishes official routes and          Perform a safe stop as described in subsection
official school bus stops. All stops should be                10.2.1.
approved by the school district prior to making the
stop. You should never change the location of a               Students should wait in a designated location for
bus stop without written approval from the                    the school bus, facing the bus as it approaches.
appropriate school district official.
                                                              Students should board the bus only when signaled
You must use extreme caution when approaching                 by the driver.
a school bus stop. You are in a very demanding
situation when entering these areas. It is critical           Monitor all mirrors continuously.
that you understand and follow all state and local
laws and regulations regarding approaching a                  Count the number of students at the bus stop and
school bus stop. This would involve the proper use            be sure all board the bus. If possible, know names
of mirrors, alternating flashing lights, and when             of students at each stop. If there is a student
equipped, the moveable stop signal arm and                    missing, ask the other students where the student
crossing control arm.                                         is.

When approaching the stop, you should:                        Have the students board the school bus slowly, in
                                                              single file, and use the handrail. The dome light
Approach cautiously at a slow rate of speed.                  should be on while loading in the dark.

Look for pedestrians, traffic, or other objects               Wait until students are seated and facing forward
before, during, and after coming to a stop.                   before moving the bus.

Continuously check all mirrors.                               Check all mirrors. Make certain no one is running
                                                              to catch the bus.
If the school bus is so equipped, activate
alternating flashing amber warning lights at least            If you cannot account for a student outside, secure
200 feet or approximately 5-10 seconds before the             the bus, take the key, and check around and
school bus stop or in accordance with state law.              underneath the bus.

Turn on right turn signal indicator about 100-300             When all students are accounted for, prepare to
feet or approximately 3-5 seconds before pulling              leave by:
over.
                                                              Closing the door.
Continuously check mirrors to monitor the danger
zones for students, traffic, and other objects.               Engaging the transmission.

Move as far as possible to the right on the traveled          Releasing the parking brake.
portion of the roadway.
                                                              Turning off alternating flashing red lights.
When stopping you should:
                                                              Turning on left turn signal.
Bring school bus to a full stop with the front
bumper at least 10 feet away from students at the             Checking all mirrors again.
designated stop. This forces the students to walk
to the bus so you have a better view of their                 Allowing congested traffic to disperse.
movements.
                                                              When it is safe, move the bus to enter traffic flow
Place transmission in Park, or if there is no Park            and continue the route.
shift point, in Neutral and set the parking brake at
each stop.                                                    The loading procedure is essentially the same
                                                              wherever you load students, but there are slight
Activate alternating red lights when traffic is a safe        differences. When students are loading at the
distance from the school bus and ensure stop arm              school campus, you should:
is extended.
                                                              Turn off the ignition switch.
Make a final check to see that all traffic has
stopped before completely opening the door and                Remove key if leaving driver's compartment.
signaling students to approach.
                                                              Position yourself to supervise loading as required
                                                              or recommended by your state or local regulations.

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     Page 10-4
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

10.2.3 ­ Unloading Procedures on the Route                    Stop at the right edge of the roadway. You should
                                                              be able to see the student's feet.
Perform a safe stop at designated unloading areas             When students reach the edge of the roadway,
as described in subsection 10.2.1.                            they should:

Have the students remain seated until told to exit.           Stop and look in all directions, making sure the
                                                              roadway is clear and is safe.
Check all mirrors.
                                                              Check to see if the red flashing lights on the bus
Count the number of students while unloading to               are still flashing.
confirm the location of all students before pulling
away from the stop.                                           Wait for your signal before crossing the roadway.

Tell students to exit the bus and walk at least 10            Upon your signal, the students should:
feet away from the side of the bus to a position
where the driver can plainly see all students.                Cross far enough in front of the school bus to be in
                                                              your view.
Check all mirrors again. Make sure no students are
around or returning to the bus.                               Stop at the left edge of the school bus, stop, and
                                                              look again for your signal to continue to cross the
If you cannot account for a student outside the               roadway.
bus, secure the bus, and check around and
underneath the bus.                                           Look for traffic in both directions, making sure
                                                              roadway is clear.
When all students are accounted for, prepare to
leave by:                                                     Proceed across the roadway, continuing to look in
                                                              all directions.
Closing the door.
                                                              Note: The school bus driver should enforce any
Engaging transmission.                                        state or local regulations or recommendations
                                                              concerning student actions outside the school bus.
Releasing parking brake.
                                                              10.2.4 ­ Unloading Procedures at School
Turning off alternating flashing red lights.
                                                              State and local laws and regulations regarding
Turning on left turn signal.                                  unloading students at schools, particularly in
                                                              situations where such activities take place in the
Checking all mirrors again.                                   school parking lot or other location that is off the
                                                              traveled roadway, are often different than
Allowing congested traffic to disperse.                       unloading along the school bus route. It is
                                                              important that the school bus driver understands
When it is safe, move the bus, enter the traffic flow         and obeys state and local laws and regulations.
and continue the route.                                       The following procedures are meant to be general
                                                              guidelines.
Note. If you have missed a student's unloading
stop, do not back up. Be sure to follow local                 When unloading at the school you should follow
procedures.                                                   these procedures:

Additional Procedures for Students That Must                  Perform a safe stop at designated unloading areas
Cross the Roadway. You should understand what                 as described in subsection 10.2.1.
students should do when exiting a school bus and
crossing the street in front of the bus. In addition,         Secure the bus by:
the school bus driver should understand that
students might not always do what they are                    Turning off the ignition switch.
supposed to do. If a student or students must cross
the roadway, they should follow these procedures:             Removing key if leaving driver's compartment.

Walk approximately 10 feet away from the side of              Have the students remain seated until told to exit.
the school bus to a position where you can see
them.                                                         Position yourself to supervise unloading as
                                                              required or recommended by your state or local
Walk to a location at least 10 feet in front of the           regulations.
right corner of the bumper, but still remaining away
from the front of the school bus.                             Have students exit in orderly fashion.

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     Page 10-5
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Observe students as they step from bus to see that            10.2.6 ­ Post-trip Inspection
all move promptly away from the unloading area.
                                                              When your route or school activity trip is finished,
Walk through the bus and check for                            you should conduct a post-trip inspection of the
hiding/sleeping students and items left by students.          bus.

Check all mirrors. Make certain no students are               You should walk through the bus and around the
returning to the bus.                                         bus looking for the following:

If you cannot account for a student outside the bus           Articles left on the bus.
and the bus is secure, check around and
underneath the bus.                                           Sleeping students.

When all students are accounted for, prepare to               Open windows and doors.
leave by:
                                                              Mechanical/operational problems with the bus, with
Closing the door.                                             special attention to items that are unique to school
                                                              buses ­ mirror systems, flashing warning lamps
Fastening safety belt.                                        and stop signal arms.

Starting engine.                                              Damage or vandalism.

Engaging the transmission.                                    Any problems or special situations should be
                                                              reported immediately to your supervisor or school
Releasing the parking brake.                                  authorities.

Turning off alternating flashing red lights.                  10.3 ­ Emergency Exit and Evacuation

Turning on left turn signal.                                  An emergency situation can happen to anyone,
                                                              anytime, anywhere. It could be a crash, a stalled
Checking all mirrors again.                                   school bus on a railroad-highway crossing or in a
                                                              high-speed intersection, an electrical fire in the
Allowing congested traffic to disperse.                       engine compartment, a medical emergency to a
                                                              student on the school bus, etc. Knowing what to do
When it is safe, pull away from the unloading area.           in an emergency­before, during and after an
                                                              evacuation­can mean the difference between life
10.2.5 ­ Special Dangers of Loading and                       and death.
Unloading
                                                              10.3.1 ­ Planning for Emergencies
Dropped or Forgotten Objects. Always focus on
students as they approach the bus and watch for               Determine Need to Evacuate Bus. The first and
any who disappear from sight.                                 most important consideration is for you to
                                                              recognize the hazard. If time permits, school bus
Students may drop an object near the bus during               drivers should contact their dispatcher to explain
loading and unloading. Stopping to pick up the                the situation before making a decision to evacuate
object, or returning to pick up the object may cause          the school bus.
the student to disappear from the driver's sight at a
very dangerous moment.                                        As a general rule, student safety and control is
                                                              best maintained by keeping students on the bus
Students should be told to leave any dropped                  during an emergency and/or impending crisis
object and move to a point of safety out of the               situation, if so doing does not expose them to
danger zones and attempt to get the driver's                  unnecessary risk or injury. Remember, the
attention to retrieve the object.                             decision to evacuate the bus must be a timely one.

Handrail Hang-ups. Students have been injured                 A decision to evacuate should include
or killed when clothing, accessories, or even parts           consideration of the following conditions:
of their body get caught in the handrail or door as
they exited the bus. You should closely observe all           Is there a fire or danger of fire?
students exiting the bus to confirm that they are in
a safe location prior to moving the bus.                      Is there a smell of raw or leaking fuel?

                                                              Is there a chance the bus could be hit by other
                                                              vehicles?

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     Page 10-6
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Is the bus in the path of a sighted tornado or rising         If the bus is in the direct path of a sighted tornado
waters?                                                       and evacuation is ordered, escort students to a
                                                              nearby ditch or culvert if shelter in a building is not
Are there downed power lines?                                 readily available, and direct them to lie face down,
                                                              hands covering their head. They should be far
Would removing students expose them to                        enough away so the bus cannot topple on them.
speeding traffic, severe weather, or a dangerous
environment such as downed power lines?                       Avoid areas that are subject to flash floods.

Would moving students complicate injuries such as             General Procedures. Determine if evacuation is in
neck and back injuries and fractures?                         the best interest of safety.

Is there a hazardous spill involved? Sometimes, it            Determine the best type of evacuation:
may be safer to remain on the bus and not come in             Front, rear or side door evacuation, or some
contact with the material.                                    combination of doors.
                                                              Roof or window evacuation.
Mandatory Evacuations. The driver must                        Secure the bus by:
evacuate the bus when:
                                                              Placing transmission in Park, or if there is no shift
The bus is on fire or there is a threat of a fire.            point, in Neutral.

The bus is stalled on or adjacent to a railroad-              Setting parking brakes.
highway crossing.
                                                              Shutting off the engine.
The position of the bus may change and increase
the danger.                                                   Removing ignition key.

There is an imminent danger of collision.                     Activating hazard-warning lights.

There is a need to quickly evacuate because of a              If time allows, notify dispatch office of evacuation
hazardous materials spill.                                    location, conditions, and type of assistance
                                                              needed.
10.3.2 ­ Evacuation Procedures
                                                              Dangle radio microphone or telephone out of
Be Prepared and Plan Ahead. When possible,                    driver's window for later use, if operable.
assign two responsible, older student assistants to
each emergency exit. Teach them how to assist                 If no radio, or radio is inoperable, dispatch a
the other students off the bus. Assign another                passing motorist or area resident to call for help.
student assistant to lead the students to a "safe             As a last resort, dispatch two older, responsible
place" after evacuation. However, you must                    students to go for help.
recognize that there may not be older, responsible
students on the bus at the time of the emergency.             Order the evacuation.
Therefore, emergency evacuation procedures must
be explained to all students. This includes knowing           Evacuate students from the bus.
how to operate the various emergency exits and
the importance of listening to and following all              Do not move a student you believe may have
instructions given by you.                                    suffered a neck or spinal injury unless his or her
                                                              life is in immediate danger.
Some tips to determine a safe place:
                                                              Special procedures must be used to move neck
A safe place will be at least 100 feet off the road in        spinal injury victims to prevent further injury.
the direction of oncoming traffic. This will keep the
students from being hit by debris if another vehicle          Direct a student assistant to lead students to the
collides with the bus.                                        nearest safe place.

Lead students upwind of the bus if fire is present.           Walk through the bus to ensure no students remain
                                                              on the bus. Retrieve emergency equipment.
Lead students as far away from railroad tracks as
possible and in the direction of any oncoming train.          Join waiting students. Account for all students and
                                                              check for their safety.
Lead students upwind of the bus at least 300 feet if
there is a risk from spilled hazardous materials.             Protect the scene. Set out emergency warning
                                                              devices as necessary and appropriate.

                                                              Prepare information for emergency responders.

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     Page 10-7
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

10.4 ­ Railroad-highway Crossings                             There is also a no passing zone sign on two-lane
                                                              roads. There may be a white stop line painted on
10.4.1 ­ Types of Crossings                                   the pavement before the railroad tracks. The front
                                                              of the school bus must remain behind this line
Passive Crossings. This type of crossing does                 while stopped at the crossing. See Figure 10.6.
not have any type of traffic control device. You
must stop at these crossings and follow proper
procedures. However, the decision to proceed
rests entirely in your hands. Passive crossings
require you to recognize the crossing, search for
any train using the tracks and decide if there is
sufficient clear space to cross safely. Passive
crossings have yellow circular advance warning
signs, pavement markings and cross-bucks to
assist you in recognizing a crossing.

Active Crossings. This type of crossing has a
traffic control device installed at the crossing to
regulate traffic at the crossing. These active
devices include flashing red lights, with or without
bells and flashing red lights with bells and gates.

10.4.2 ­ Warning Signs and Devices                                                      Figure 10.6

Advance Warning Signs. The round, black-on-                   Cross-buck Signs. This sign marks the crossing.
yellow warning sign is placed ahead of a public               It requires you to yield the right-of-way to the train.
railroad-highway crossing. The advance warning                If there is no white line painted on the pavement,
sign tells you to slow down, look and listen for the          you must stop the bus before the cross-buck sign.
train, and be prepared to stop at the tracks if a train       When the road crosses over more than one set of
is coming. See Figure 10.5.                                   tracks, a sign below the cross-buck indicates the
                                                              number of tracks. See Figure 10.7.

                          Figure 10.5                                                   Figure 10.7
Pavement Markings. Pavement markings mean
the same as the advance warning sign. They                    Flashing Red Light Signals. At many highway-rail
consist of an "X" with the letters ""RR" and a no-            grade crossings, the cross-buck sign has flashing
passing marking on two-lane roads.                            red lights and bells. When the lights begin to flash,
                                                              stop! A train is approaching. You are required to
Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     yield the right-of-way to the train. If there is more
Version: July 2014
                                                                                                                                    Page 10-8
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

than one track, make sure all tracks are clear                Activate hazard lights approximately 200 feet
before crossing. See Figure 10.8.                             before the crossing. Make sure your intentions are
                                                              known.
Gates. Many railroad-highway crossings have
gates with flashing red lights and bells. Stop when           Scan your surroundings and check for traffic
the lights begin to flash and before the gate lowers          behind you.
across the road lane. Remain stopped until the
gates go up and the lights have stopped flashing.             Stay to the right of the roadway if possible.
Proceed when it is safe. If the gate stays down
after the train passes, do not drive around the               Choose an escape route in the event of a brake
gate. Instead, call your dispatcher. See Figure               failure or problems behind you.
10.8.
                                                              At the Crossing:
10.4.3 ­ Recommended Procedures
                                                              Stop no closer than 15 feet and no farther than 50
Each state has laws and regulations governing                 feet from the nearest rail, where you have the best
how school buses must operate at railroad-                    view of the tracks.
highway crossings. It is important for you to
understand and obey these state laws and                      Place the transmission in Park, or if there is no
regulations. In general, school buses must stop at            Park shift point, in Neutral and press down on the
all crossings, and ensure it is safe before                   service brake or set the parking brakes.
proceeding across the tracks. The specific
procedures required in each state vary.                       Turn off all radios and noisy equipment, and
                                                              silence the passengers.

                                                              Open the service door and driver's window. Look
                                                              and listen for an approaching train.

                                                              Crossing the Track:  signals  again            before

                                                              Check the crossing
                                                              proceeding.

                                                              At a multiple-track crossing, stop only before the
                                                              first set of tracks. When you are sure no train is
                                                              approaching on any track, proceed across all of
                                                              the tracks until you have completely cleared them.

                                                              Cross the tracks in a low gear. Do not change
                                                              gears while crossing.

                                                              If the gate comes down after you have started
                                                              across, drive through it even if it means you will
                                                              break the gate.

                          Figure 10.8                         10.4.4 ­ Special Situations

A school bus is one of the safest vehicles on the             Bus Stalls or Trapped on Tracks. If your bus
highway. However, a school bus does not have the              stalls or is trapped on the tracks, get everyone out
slightest edge when involved in a crash with a                and off the tracks immediately. Move everyone far
train. Because of a train's size and weight it cannot         from the bus at an angle, which is both away from
stop quickly. An emergency escape route does not              the tracks and toward the train.
exist for a train. You can prevent school bus/train
crashes by following these recommended                        Police Officer at the Crossing. If a police officer
procedures.                                                   is at the crossing, obey directions. If there is no
                                                              police officer, and you believe the signal is
Approaching the Crossing:                                     malfunctioning, call your dispatcher to report the
                                                              situation and ask for instructions on how to
Slow down, including shifting to a lower gear in a            proceed.
manual transmission bus, and test your brakes.
                                                              Obstructed View of Tracks. Plan your route so it
Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     provides maximum sight distance at highway-rail
Version: July 2014                                            grade crossings. Do not attempt to cross the tracks
                                                              unless you can see far enough down the track to
                                                              know for certain that no trains are approaching.
                                                              Passive crossings are those that do not have any

                                                                                                                                    Page 10-9
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

type of traffic control device. Be especially careful         Never put a student off the bus except at school or
at "passive" crossings. Even if there are active              at his or her designated school bus stop. If you feel
railroad signals that indicate the tracks are clear,          that the offense is serious enough that you cannot
you must look and listen to be sure it is safe to             safely drive the bus, call for a school administrator
proceed.                                                      or the police to come and remove the student.

Containment or Storage Areas. If it won't fit,                Always follow your state or local procedures for
don't commit! Know the length of your bus and the
size of the containment area at highway-rail                  requesting  assistance.
crossings on the school bus route, as well as any
crossing you encounter in the course of a school
activity trip. When approaching a crossing with a
signal or stop sign on the opposite side, pay
attention to the amount of room there. Be certain
the bus has enough containment or storage area
to completely clear the railroad tracks on the other
side if there is a need to stop. As a general rule,
add 15 feet to the length of the school bus to
determine an acceptable amount of containment or
storage area.

10.5 ­ Student Management

10.5.1 ­ Don't Deal with On-bus Problems
When Loading and Unloading

In order to get students to and from school safely
and on time, you need to be able to concentrate on
the driving task.

Loading and unloading requires all your
concentration. Don't take your eyes off what is
happening outside the bus.

If there is a behavior problem on the bus, wait until
the students unloading are safely off the bus and
have moved away. If necessary, pull the bus over
to handle the problem.

10.5.2 ­ Handling Serious Problems

Tips on handling serious problems:

Follow your school's procedures for discipline or
refusal of rights to ride the bus.

Stop the bus. Park in a safe location off the road,
perhaps a parking lot or a driveway.

Secure the bus. Take the ignition key with you if
you leave your seat.

Stand up and speak respectfully to the offender or
offenders. Speak in a courteous manner with a firm
voice. Remind the offender of the expected
behavior. Do not show anger, but do show that you
mean business.

If a change of seating is needed, request that the
student move to a seat near you.

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                                 Page 10-10
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

10.6 ­ Antilock Braking Systems                               check and then goes out quickly. On older
                                                              systems, the lamp could stay on until you are
10.6.1 ­ Vehicles Required to Have Antilock                   driving over five mph.
Braking Systems
                                                              If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes
The Department of Transportation requires that                on once you are under way, you may have lost
antilock braking systems be on:                               ABS control at one or more wheels.

Air brakes vehicles, (trucks, buses, trailers and             Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still
converter dollies) built on or after March 1, 1998.           have regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the
                                                              system serviced soon.
Hydraulically braked trucks and buses with a gross
vehicle weight rating of 10,000 lbs or more built on          10.6.5 ­ Safety Reminders
or after March 1, 1999.
                                                              ABS won't allow you to drive faster, follow more
Many buses built before these dates have been                 closely, or drive less carefully.
voluntarily equipped with ABS.
                                                              ABS won't prevent power or turning skids ­
Your school bus will have a yellow ABS                        ABS should prevent brake-induced skids but not
malfunction lamp on the instrument panel if it is             those caused by spinning the drive wheels or
equipped with ABS.                                            going too fast in a turn.

10.6.2 ­ How ABS Helps You                                    ABS won't necessarily shorten stopping
                                                              distance. ABS will help maintain vehicle control,
When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a                 but not always shorten stopping distance.
vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up.
When your steering wheels lock up, you lose                   ABS won't increase or decrease ultimate
steering control. When your other wheels lock up,             stopping power ­ ABS is an "add-on" to your
you may skid or even spin the vehicle.                        normal brakes, not a replacement for them.

ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up and maintain                ABS won't change the way you normally brake.
control. You may or may not be able to stop faster            Under normal brake conditions, your vehicle will
with ABS, but you should be able to steer around              stop as it always stopped. ABS only comes into
an obstacle while braking, and avoid skids caused             play when a wheel would normally have locked up
by over braking.                                              because of over braking.

10.6.3 ­ Braking with ABS                                     ABS won't compensate for bad brakes or poor
                                                              brake maintenance.
When you drive a vehicle with ABS, you should
brake as you always have. In other words:                     Remember: The best vehicle safety feature is still
                                                              a safe driver.
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely
and stay in control.                                          Remember: Drive so you never need to use your
                                                              ABS.
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you
have ABS on the bus. However, in emergency                    Remember: If you need it, ABS could help to
braking, do not pump the brakes on a bus with                 prevent a serious crash.
ABS.
                                                              10.7 ­ Special Safety Considerations
As you slow down, monitor your bus and back off
the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to stay in control.       10.7.1 ­ Strobe Lights

10.6.4 ­ Braking if ABS is Not Working                        Some school buses are equipped with roof-
                                                              mounted, white strobe lights. If your bus is so
Without ABS, you still have normal brake functions.           equipped, the overhead strobe light should be
Drive and brake as you always have.                           used when you have limited visibility. This means
                                                              that you cannot easily see around you ­ in front,
Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps               behind, or beside the school bus. Your visibility
to tell you if something is not working. The yellow           could be only slightly limited or it could be so bad
ABS malfunction lamp is on the bus's instrument               that you can see nothing at all. In all instances,
panel.                                                        understand and obey your state or local
As a system check on newer vehicles, the                      regulations concerning the use of these lights.
malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb
                                                                                                                                  Page 10-11
Section 10 ­ School Buses
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

10.7.2 ­ Driving in High Winds                                           Section 10
                                                                  Test Your Knowledge
Strong winds affect the handling of the school bus!
The side of a school bus acts like a sail on a                1.  Define the danger zone. How far does the
sailboat. Strong winds can push the school bus
sideways. They can even move the school bus off                   danger zone extend around the bus?
the road or, in extreme conditions, tip it over.
If you are caught in strong winds:                            2.  What should you be able to see if the

Keep a strong grip on the steering wheel. Try to                  outside flat mirrors are adjusted properly?
anticipate gusts.
                                                                  The outside convex mirrors? The
You should slow down to lessen the effect of the
wind, or pull off the roadway and wait.                           crossover mirrors?

Contact your dispatcher to get more information on            3.  You are loading students along the route.
how to proceed.
                                                                  When should you activate your alternating
10.7.3 ­ Backing
                                                                  flashing amber warning lights?
Backing a school bus is strongly discouraged. You
should back your bus only when you have no other              4.  You are unloading students along your
safe way to move the vehicle. You should never
back a school bus when students are outside of                    route. Where should students walk to after
the bus. Backing is dangerous and increases your
risk of a collision. If you have no choice and you                exiting the bus?
must back your bus, follow these procedures:
                                                              5.  After unloading at school, why should you
Post a lookout. The purpose of the lookout is to
warn you about obstacles, approaching persons,                    walk through the bus?
and other vehicles. The lookout should not give
directions on how to back the bus.                            6.  What position should students be in front

Signal for quiet on the bus.                                      of the bus before they cross the roadway?

Constantly check all mirrors and rear windows.                7.  Under what conditions must you evacuate

Back slowly and smoothly.                                         the bus?

If no lookout is available:                                   8.  How far from the nearest rail should you
Set the parking brake.
Turn off the motor and take the keys with you.                    stop at a highway-rail crossing?
Walk to the rear of the bus to determine whether
the way is clear.                                             9.  What is a passive highway-rail crossing?

If you must back-up at a student pick-up point, be                Why should you be extra cautious at this
sure to pick up students before backing and watch
for late comers at all times.                                     type of crossing?

Be sure that all students are in the bus before               10. How should you use your brakes if your
backing.
                                                                  vehicle is equipped with antilock brakes
If you must back-up at a student drop-off point, be
sure to unload students after backing.                            (ABS)?

10.7.4 ­ Tail Swing                                           These questions may be on your test. If you can't

A school bus can have up to a three-foot tail swing.          answer them all, re-read Section 10.
You need to check your mirrors before and during
any turning movements to monitor the tail swing.

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                                                           Page 10-12
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                     THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.

Section 10 ­ School Buses                                     Page 10-13
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 11                                         Power steering belt.
  Vehicle Inspection Test                                     Water pump belt.
                                                              Alternator belt.
This Section Covers                                           Air compressor belt.

 Internal Inspection                                          Note: If any of the components listed above are
 External Inspection                                          not belt driven, you must:
                                                              Tell the examiner which component(s) are not belt
During the Vehicle inspection, you must show that             driven.
the vehicle is safe to drive. You will have to walk           Make sure component(s) are operating properly,
around the vehicle and point to or touch each item            are not damaged or leaking, and are mounted
and explain to the examiner what you are checking             securely.
and why. You will NOT have to crawl under the
hood or under the vehicle.                                    Safe Start
                                                              Depress clutch.
11.1 All Vehicles                                             Place gearshift lever in neutral (or park, for
                                                              automatic transmissions).
Study the following vehicle parts for the type of             Start engine, then release clutch slowly.
vehicle you will be using during the CDL skills
tests. You should be able to identify each part and           11.1.2 ­ Cab Check/Engine Start
tell the examiner what you are looking for or
inspecting.                                                   Oil Pressure Gauge
                                                              Make sure oil pressure gauge is working.
11.1.1 Engine Compartment (Engine Off)                        Check that pressure gauge shows increasing or
                                                              normal oil pressure or that the warning light goes
Leaks/Hoses                                                   off.
Look for puddles on the ground.                               If equipped, oil temperature gauge should begin a
Look for dripping fluids on underside of engine and           gradual rise to the normal operating range.
transmission.
Inspect hoses for condition and leaks.                        Temperature Gauge
                                                              Make sure the temperature gauge is working.
Oil Level                                                     Temperature should begin to climb to the normal
Indicate where dipstick is located.                           operating range or temperature light should be off.
See that oil level is within safe operating range.
Level must be above refill mark.                              Air Gauge
                                                              Make sure the air gauge is working properly.
Coolant Level                                                 Build air pressure to governor cut-out, roughly 120-
Inspect reservoir sight glass, or                             140 psi.
(If engine is not hot), remove radiator cap and
check for visible coolant level.                              Ammeter/Voltmeter
                                                              Check that gauges show alternator and/or
Power Steering Fluid                                          generator is charging or that warning light is off.
Indicate where power steering fluid dipstick is
located.                                                      Mirrors and Windshield
Check for adequate power steering fluid level.                Mirrors should be clean and adjusted properly from
Level must be above refill mark.                              the inside.
                                                              Windshield should be clean with no illegal stickers,
Engine Compartment Belts                                      no obstructions, or damage to the glass.
Check the following belts for snugness (up to 3/4
inch play at center of belt), cracks, or frays:                                                                                    Page 11-1

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Emergency Equipment                                           Parking Brake Check
Check for spare electrical fuses.
Check for three red reflective triangles, 6 fusees or         With the parking brake engaged (trailer brakes
3 liquid burning flares.                                      released on combination vehicles), check that the
Check for a properly charged and rated fire                   parking brake will hold vehicle by gently trying to pull
extinguisher.                                                 forward with parking brake on.
Note: If the vehicle is not equipped with electrical
fuses, you must mention this to the examiner.                 With the parking brake released and the trailer
                                                              parking brake engaged (combination vehicles
Wipers/Washers                                                only), check that the trailer parking brake will hold
Check that wiper arms and blades are secure, not              vehicle by gently trying to pull forward with the
damaged, and operate smoothly.                                trailer parking brake on.
If equipped, windshield washers must operate
correctly.                                                    Hydraulic Brake Check

Lights/Reflectors/Reflector Tape Condition                    Pump the brake pedal three times, then hold it
(Sides & Rear)                                                down for five seconds. The brake pedal should not
Test that dash indicators work when corresponding             move (depress) during the five seconds.
lights are turned on:
Left turn signal.                                             If equipped with a hydraulic brake reserve (back-
Right turn signal.                                            up) system, with the key off, depress the brake
Four-way emergency flashers.                                  pedal and listen for the sound of the reserve
High beam headlight.                                          system electric motor.
Anti-lock Braking System (ABS) indicator.
Check that all external lights and reflective                 Check that the warning buzzer or light is off.
equipment are clean and functional. Light and
reflector checks include:                                     Air Brake Check (Air Brake Equipped Vehicles
Clearance lights (red on rear, amber elsewhere).              Only)
Headlights (high and low beams).
Taillights.                                                   Failure to perform all three components of the air
Backing lights.                                               brake check correctly will result in an automatic
Turn signals.                                                 failure of the vehicle inspection test. Air brake
Four-way flashers.                                            safety devices vary. However, this procedure is
Brake lights.                                                 designed to see that any safety device operates
Red reflectors (on rear) and amber reflectors                 correctly as air pressure drops from normal to a
(elsewhere).                                                  low air condition. For safety purposes, in areas
Reflector tape condition                                      where an incline is present, you will use wheel
                                                              chocks during the air brake check. The proper
Note: Checks of brake, turn signal and four-way               procedures for inspecting the air brake system are
flasher functions must be done separately.                    as follows:

Horn                                                          1. With the air pressure built up to governor cutoff
Check that air horn and/or electric horn work.                     (120 ­ 140 psi), shut off the engine, chock your
                                                                   wheels if necessary, release the parking brake
Heater/Defroster                                                   (all vehicles), and the tractor protection valve
Test that the heater and defroster work.                           (combination vehicle) and fully apply the foot
                                                                   brake. Hold the foot brake for one minute.
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                                    Check the air gauge to see if the air pressure
Version: July 2014                                                 drops more than three pounds in one minute
                                                                   (single vehicle) or four pounds in one minute
                                                                   (combination vehicle).

                                                              2. Without re-starting the engine, turn electrical
                                                                   power to the "on" or "battery charge" position.
                                                                   Begin fanning off the air pressure by rapidly
                                                                   applying and releasing the foot brake. Low air
                                                                   warning devices (buzzer, light, flag) should
                                                                   activate before air pressure drops below 60 psi
                                                                   or level specified by the manufacturer..

                                                              3. Continue to fan off the air pressure. At
                                                                   approximately 40 psi on a tractor-trailer
                                                                   combination vehicle (or level specified by the
                                                                   manufacturer), the tractor protection valve and

                                                                                                                                   Page 11-2
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

     parking brake valve should close (pop out). On           Mounts
     other combination vehicle types and single               Look for cracked or broken spring hangers,
     vehicle types, the parking brake valve should            missing or damaged bushings, and broken, loose,
     close (pop out).                                         or missing bolts, u-bolts or other axle mounting
                                                              parts. (The mounts should be checked at each
Service Brake Check                                           point where they are secured to the vehicle frame
                                                              and axle[s]).
You will be required to check the application of air
or hydraulic service brakes. This procedure is                Shock Absorbers
designed to determine that the brakes are working             See that shock absorbers are secure and that
correctly and that the vehicle does not pull to one           there are no leaks.
side or the other.
                                                              Note: Be prepared to perform the same
Pull forward at 5 mph, apply the service brake and            suspension components inspection on every axle
stop. Check to see that the vehicle does not pull to          (power unit and trailer, if equipped).
either side and that it stops when brake is applied.
                                                              11.2.3 ­ Brakes
Safety Belt
                                                              Slack Adjustors and Pushrods
Check that the safety belt is securely mounted,               Look for broken, loose, or missing parts.
adjusts, latches properly and is not ripped or                For manual slack adjustors, the brake pushrod
frayed.                                                       should not move more than one inch (with the
                                                              brakes released) when pulled by hand.
11.2 ­ External Inspection (All Vehicles)
                                                              Brake Chambers
11.2.1­ Steering                                              See that brake chambers are not leaking, cracked,
                                                              or dented and are mounted securely.
Steering Box/Hoses
                                                              Brake Hoses/Lines
Check that the steering box is securely mounted               Look for cracked, worn, or leaking hoses, lines,
and not leaking. Look for any missing nuts, bolts,            and couplings.
and cotter keys.
                                                              Drum Brake
Check for power steering fluid leaks or damage to             Check for cracks, dents, or holes. Also check for
power steering hoses.                                         loose or missing bolts.
                                                              Check for contaminates such debris or oil/grease.
Steering Linkage                                              Brake linings (where visible) should not be worn
                                                              dangerously thin.
See that connecting links, arms, and rods from the
steering box to the wheel are not worn or cracked.            Brake Linings
                                                              On some brake drums, there are openings where
Check that joints and sockets are not worn or loose           the brake linings can be seen from outside the
and that there are no missing nuts, bolts, or cotter          drum. For this type of drum, check that a visible
keys.                                                         amount of brake lining is showing.

11.2.2 ­ Suspension                                           Note: Be prepared to perform the same brake
                                                              components inspection on every axle (power unit
Springs/Air/Torque                                            and trailer, if equipped).

Look for missing, shifted, cracked, or broken leaf
springs.

Look for broken or distorted coil springs.

If vehicle is equipped with torsion bars, torque
arms, or other types of suspension components,
check that they are not damaged and are mounted
securely.

Air ride suspension should be checked for damage
and leaks.

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                               Page 11-3
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

11.2.4 ­ Wheels                                               Fuel Tank
                                                              Check that tank(s) are secure, cap(s) are tight, and
Rims                                                          that there are no leaks from tank(s) or lines.
Check for damaged or bent rims. Rims cannot
have welding repairs.                                         Drive Shaft
                                                              See that drive shaft is not bent or cracked.
Tires                                                         Couplings should be secure and free of foreign
The following items must be inspected on every                objects.
tire:
Tread depth: Check for minimum tread depth                    Exhaust System
(4/32 on steering axle tires, 2/32 on all other tires).       Check system for damage and signs of leaks such
Tire condition: Check that tread is evenly worn               as rust or carbon soot.
and look for cuts or other damage to tread or                 System should be connected tightly and mounted
sidewalls. Also, make sure that valve caps and                securely.
stems are not missing, broken, or damaged.
Tire inflation: Check for proper inflation by using a         Frame
tire gauge. Note: You will not get credit if you              Look for cracks, broken welds, holes or other
simply kick the tires to check for proper inflation.          damage to the longitudinal frame members, cross
                                                              members, box, and floor.
Hub Oil Seals/Axle Seals
See that hub oil/grease seals and axle seals are              11.2.6 ­ Rear of Vehicle
not leaking and, if wheel has a sight glass, oil level        Splash Guards
is adequate.                                                  If equipped, check that splash guards or mud flaps
                                                              are not damaged and are mounted securely.
Lug Nuts
Check that all lug nuts are present, free of cracks           Doors/Ties/Lifts
and distortions, and show no signs of looseness               Check that doors and hinges are not damaged and
such as rust trails or shiny threads.                         that they open, close, and latch properly from the
Make sure all bolt holes are not cracked or                   outside, if equipped.
distorted.                                                    Ties, straps, chains, and binders must also be
                                                              secure.
Spacers or Budd Spacing                                       If equipped with a cargo lift, look for leaking,
                                                              damaged or missing parts and explain how it
If equipped, check that spacers are not bent,                 should be checked for correct operation.
damaged, or rusted through.                                   Lift must be fully retracted and latched securely.

Spacers should be evenly centered, with the dual              11.2.7 ­ Tractor/Coupling
wheels and tires evenly separated.
                                                              Air/Electric Lines
Note: Be prepared to perform the same wheel                   Listen for air leaks. Check that air hoses and
inspection on every axle (power unit and trailer, if          electrical lines are not cut, chafed, spliced, or worn
equipped).                                                    (steel braid should not show through).
                                                              Make sure air and electrical lines are not tangled,
11.2.5 ­ Side of Vehicle                                      pinched, or dragging against tractor parts.

Door(s)/Mirror(s)
Check that door(s) are not damaged and that they
open and close properly from the outside.
Hinges should be secure with seals intact.
Check that mirror(s) and mirror brackets are not
damaged and are mounted securely with no loose
fittings.

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                               Page 11-4
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Catwalk/Steps                                                 Locking Pins (Fifth Wheel)

Check that the catwalk is solid, clear of objects,            If equipped, look for loose or missing pins in the
and securely bolted to tractor frame.                         slide mechanism of the sliding fifth wheel. If air
                                                              powered, check for leaks.
Check that steps leading to the cab entry and                 Make sure locking pins are fully engaged.
catwalk (if equipped) are solid, clear of objects,
and securely bolted to tractor frame.                         Check that the fifth wheel is positioned properly so
                                                              that the tractor frame will clear the landing gear
Mounting Bolts                                                during turns.

Look for loose or missing mounting brackets,                  Sliding Pintle
clamps, bolts, or nuts. Both the fifth wheel and the
slide mounting must be solidly attached.                      Check that the sliding pintle is secured with no
                                                              loose or missing nuts or bolts and cotter pin is in
On other types of coupling systems (i.e., ball hitch,         place.
pintle hook, etc.), inspect all coupling components
and mounting brackets for missing or broken parts.            Tongue or Draw-bar

Hitch Release Lever                                           Check that the tongue/draw-bar is not bent or
                                                              twisted and checks for broken welds and stress
Check to see that the hitch release lever is in place         cracks.
and is secure.
                                                              Check that the tongue/draw-bar is not worn
Locking Jaws                                                  excessively.
                                                              Tongue Storage Area
Look into fifth wheel gap and check that locking
jaws are fully closed around the kingpin.                     Check that the storage area is solid and secured to
                                                              the tongue.
On other types of coupling systems (i.e., ball hitch,
pintle hook, etc.), inspect the locking mechanism             Check that cargo in the storage area i.e. chains,
for missing or broken parts and make sure it is               binders, etc. are secure.
locked securely. If present, safety cables or chains
must be secure and free of kinks and excessive                11.3 ­ School Bus Only
slack.
                                                              Emergency Equipment
5th Wheel Skid Plate
Check for proper lubrication and that 5th wheel skid          In addition to checking for spare electrical fuses (if
plate is securely mounted to the platform and that            equipped), three red reflective triangles, and a
all bolts and pins are secure and not missing.                properly charged and rated fire extinguisher,
                                                              school bus drivers must also inspect the following
Platform (Fifth Wheel)                                        emergency equipment:
                                                              Emergency Kit
Check for cracks or breaks in the platform structure
which supports the fifth wheel skid plate.                    Body Fluid Cleanup Kit

Release Arm (Fifth Wheel)                                     Lighting Indicators

If equipped, make sure the release arm is in the              In addition to checking the lighting indicators listed
engaged position and the safety latch is in place.            in Section 10.2 of this manual, school bus drivers
                                                              must also check the following lighting indicators
Kingpin/Apron/Gap                                             (internal panel lights):

Check that the kingpin is not bent.                           Alternately flashing amber lights indicator, if
                                                              equipped.
Make sure the visible part of the apron is not bent,
cracked, or broken.                                           Alternately flashing red lights indicator.
                                                              Strobe light indicator, if equipped.
Check that the trailer is lying flat on the fifth wheel
skid plate (no gap).

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                               Page 11-5
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Lights/Reflectors                                             Check that seat cushions are attached securely to
In addition to checking the lights and reflective             the seat frames.
devices listed in Section 10.2 of this manual,
school bus drivers must also check the following              11.4 ­ Trailer
(external) lights and reflectors:
                                                              11.4.1 ­ Trailer Front
Strobe light, if equipped.
                                                              Air/Electrical Connections
Stop arm light, if equipped.                                  Check that trailer air connectors are sealed and in
                                                              good condition.
Alternately flashing amber lights, if equipped.               Make sure glad hands are locked in place, free of
                                                              damage or air leaks.
Alternately flashing red lights.                              Make sure the trailer electrical plug is firmly seated
                                                              and locked in place.
Student Mirrors
                                                              Header Board
In addition to checking the external mirrors, school          If equipped, check the header board to see that it
bus drivers must also check the internal and                  is secure, free of damage, and strong enough to
external mirrors used for observing students:                 contain cargo.
                                                              If equipped, the canvas or tarp carrier must be
Check for proper adjustment.                                  mounted and fastened securely.
                                                              On enclosed trailers, check the front area for signs
Checks that all internal and external mirrors and             of damage such as cracks, bulges, or holes.
mirror brackets are not damaged and are mounted
securely with no loose fittings.                              11.4.2 ­ Side of Trailer

Checks that visibility is not impaired due to dirty           Landing Gear
mirrors.                                                      Check that the landing gear is fully raised, has no
                                                              missing parts, crank handle is secure, and the
Stop Arm                                                      support frame is not damaged.
                                                              If power operated, check for air or hydraulic leaks.
If equipped, check the stop arm to see that it is
mounted securely to the frame of the vehicle. Also,           Doors/Ties/Lifts
check for loose fittings and damage.                          If equipped, check that doors are not damaged.
                                                              Check that doors open, close, and latch properly
Passenger Entry/Lift                                          from the outside.
                                                              Check that ties, straps, chains, and binders are
Check that the entry door is not damaged,                     secure.
operates smoothly, and closes securely from the               If equipped with a cargo lift, look for leaking,
inside.                                                       damaged or missing parts and explain how it
                                                              should be checked for correct operation.
Hand rails are secure and the step light is working,          Lift should be fully retracted and latched securely.
if equipped.
                                                              Frame
The entry steps must be clear with the treads not             Look for cracks, broken welds, holes or other
loose or worn excessively.                                    damage to the frame, cross members, box, and
                                                              floor.
If equipped with a handicap lift, look for leaking,
damaged, or missing parts and explain how lift                Tandem Release Arm/Locking Pins
should be checked for correct operation. Lift must            If equipped, make sure the locking pins are locked
be fully retracted and latched securely.                      in place and release arm is secured.

Emergency Exit

Make sure that all emergency exits are not
damaged, operate smoothly, and close securely
from the inside.

Check that any emergency exit warning devices
are working.

Seating

Look for broken seat frames and check that seat
frames are firmly attached to the floor.

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                               Page 11-6
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

11.4.3 ­ Remainder of Trailer                                 11.5.2 ­ Entry/ Exit

Remainder of Trailer                                          Doors/Mirrors
Please refer to Section 11.2 of this manual for
detailed inspection procedures regarding the                  Check that entry/exit doors are not damaged and
following components:                                         operate smoothly from the outside. Hinges should
Wheels.                                                       be secure with seals intact.
Suspension system.
Brakes.                                                       Make sure that the passenger exit mirrors and all
Doors/ties/lift.                                              external mirrors and mirror brackets are not
Splash guards.                                                damaged and are mounted securely with no loose
                                                              fittings.
11.5 ­ Coach/Transit Bus
                                                              11.5.3 ­ External Inspection of Coach/ Transit
11.5.1 ­ Passenger Items                                      Bus
Passenger Entry/Lift
Check that entry doors operate smoothly and close             Level/Air Leaks
securely from the inside.
Check that hand rails are secure and, if equipped,            See that the vehicle is sitting level (front and rear),
that the step light(s) are working.                           and if air-equipped, check for audible air leaks from
Check that the entry steps are clear, with the                the suspension system.
treads not loose or worn excessively.
If equipped with a handicap lift, look for any                Fuel Tank(s)
leaking, damaged or missing part, and explain how
it should be checked for correct operation.                   See that fuel tank(s) are secure with no leaks from
Lift should be fully retracted and latched securely.          tank(s) or lines.

Emergency Exits                                               Baggage Compartments
Make sure that all emergency exits are not
damaged, operate smoothly, and close securely                 Check that baggage and all other exterior
from the inside.                                              compartment doors are not damaged, operate
Check that any emergency exit warning devices                 properly, and latch securely.
are working.
                                                              Battery/Box
Passenger Seating
Look for broken seat frames and check that seat               Wherever located, see that battery(s) are secure,
frames are firmly attached to the floor.                      connections are tight, and cell caps are present.
Check that seat cushions are attached securely to
the seat frames.                                              Battery connections should not show signs of
                                                              excessive corrosion.

                                                              Check that battery box and cover or door is not
                                                              damaged and is secure.

                                                              11.5.4 ­ Remainder of Coach/ Transit Bus

                                                              Remainder of Vehicle

                                                              Please refer to Section 11.2 of this manual for
                                                              detailed inspection procedures for the remainder of
                                                              the vehicle.

                                                              Remember, the Vehicle Inspection must be
                                                              passed before you can proceed to the Basic
                                                              Control Skills test.

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                               Page 11-7
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

11.6 ­ Taking the CDL Vehicle
Inspection Test

11.6.1 ­ Class A Vehicle Inspection Test

If you are applying for a Class A CDL, you will be
required to perform one of the four versions of a
Vehicle inspection in the vehicle you have brought
with you for testing. Each of the four tests are
equivalent and you will not know which test you will
take until just before the testing begins.

All of the tests include an engine start, an in-cab-
inspection, and an inspection of the coupling
system. Then, your test may require an inspection
of the entire vehicle or only a portion of the vehicle
which your CDL Examiner will explain to you.

11.6.2 ­ Class B and C Vehicle Inspection Test

If you are applying for a Class B CDL, you will be
required to perform one of the three versions of a
Vehicle inspection in the vehicle you have brought
with you for testing. Each of the three tests are
equivalent and you will not know which test you will
take until just before the testing begins.

All of the tests include an engine start and an
in-cab inspection. Then, your test may require an
inspection of the entire vehicle or only a portion of
the vehicle which your CDL Examiner will explain
to you. You will also have to inspect any special
features of your vehicle (e.g, school or transit bus).

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                               Page 11-8
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                               Page 11-9
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                        THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK.

Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection                               Page 11-10
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 12                                         bus, maintain a firm grasp on the handrail at all
   Basic Vehicle Control                                      times). If you do not safely secure the vehicle or
                                                              safely exit the vehicle it may result in an automatic
           Skills Test                                        failure of the basic control skills test.

This Section Covers                                           The maximum number of times that you may look
                                                              to check the position of you vehicle is two (2)
 Skills Test Scoring                                          except for the Straight Line Backing exercise,
 Skills Test Exercises                                        which allows one look. Each time you open the
                                                              door, move from a seated position where in
Your basic control skills could be tested using one           physical control of the vehicle or on a bus walk to
or more of the following exercises off-road or                the back of a bus to get a better view, it is scored
somewhere on the street during the road test:                 as a "look".

Straight line backing.                                        Final Position/Inside Parallel ­ It is important that
                                                              you finish each exercise exactly as the examiner
Offset back/right                                             has instructed you. If you do not maneuver the
                                                              vehicle into its final position as described by the
Offset back/left                                              examiner, you will be penalized and could fail the
                                                              basic skills test.
Parallel park (driver side).
                                                              12.2 Exercises
Parallel park (conventional).
                                                              12.2.1 ­ Straight Line Backing
Alley dock.
                                                              You may be asked to back your vehicle in a
These exercises are shown in Figures 12-1                     straight line between two rows of cones without
through 12-6.                                                 touching or crossing over the exercise boundaries.
                                                              (See Figure 12.1.)
12.1 Scoring
                                                              12.2.2 ­ Offset Back/Right
Crossing Boundaries (encroachments)
                                                              You may be asked to back into a space that is to
Pull-ups                                                      the right rear of your vehicle. You will drive straight
                                                              forward the outer boundary. From that position
Outside Vehicle Observations (looks)                          you must back the vehicle into the opposite lane
                                                              until the front of your vehicle has passed the first
Final Position/Inside Parallel                                set of cones without striking boundary lines or
                                                              cones. (See Figure 12.2)
Encroachments ­ The examiner will score the
number of times you touch or cross over an                    12.2.3 ­ Offset Back/Left
exercise boundary line or cone with any portion of
your vehicle. Each encroachment will count as an              You may be asked to back into a space that is to
error.                                                        the left rear of your vehicle. You will drive straight
                                                              forward the outer boundary. From that position,
Pull-ups ­ When a driver stops and pulls forward              you must back the vehicle into the opposite lane
to clear an encroachment or to get a better                   until the front of your vehicle has passed the first
position, it is scored as a "pull-up". Stopping               set of cones without striking boundary lines or
without changing direction does not count as a                cones. (See Figure 12.3)
pull-up. You will not be penalized for initial pull-
ups. However, an excessive number of pull-ups,                12.2.4 ­ Parallel Park (Driver Side)
will count as errors.
                                                              You may be asked to park in a parallel parking
Outside Vehicle Observations (Looks) ­ You                    space that is on your left. You are to drive past the
may be permitted to safely stop and exit the                  entrance to the parallel parking space with your
vehicle to check the external position of the vehicle         vehicle parallel to the parking area; and back into
(look). When doing so, you must place the vehicle             the space without crossing front, side or rear
in neutral and set the parking brake(s). Then,                boundaries marked by cones. You are required to
when exiting the vehicle, you must do so safely by            get your entire vehicle completely into the space.
facing the vehicle and maintaining three points of            (See Figure 12.4)
contact with the vehicle at all times (when exiting a
                                                                                                                                   Page 12-1
Section 12 ­ Basic Control Skills
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                                                                               12.2.5 ­ Parallel Park (Conventional)

                                                                               You may be asked to park in a parallel parking
                                                                               space that is on your right. You are to drive past
                                                                               the entrance to the parallel parking space with your
                                                                               vehicle parallel to the parking area; and back into
                                                                               the space without crossing front, side or rear
                                                                               boundaries marked by cones. You are required to
                                                                               get your entire vehicle completely into the space.
                                                                               (See Figure 12.5)

                                                                               12.2.6 ­ Alley Dock

                                                                               You may be asked to sight-side back your vehicle
                                                                               into an alley. You will drive past the alley and
                                                                               position your vehicle parallel to the outer boundary.
                                                                               From that position, back into the alley bringing the
                                                                               rear of your vehicle within three feet of the rear of
                                                                               the alley without touching boundary lines or cones.
                                                                               Your vehicle must be straight within the alley/lane
                                                                               when you have completed the maneuver. (See
                                                                               Figure 12.6.)

Section 12 ­ Basic Control Skills  Page 12-2
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                Figure 12.1: Straight Line Backing
                   Figure 12.2: Offset Back/Right

                       Figure 12.3: Offset Back/Left

Section 12 ­ Basic Control Skills                             Page 12-3
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

             Figure 12.4: Parallel Park (Driver Side)

            Figure 12.5: Parallel Park (Conventional)

Section 12 ­ Basic Control Skills                             Page 12-4
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                        Figure 12.6: Alley Dock

                                      90° Alley Dock

Section 12 ­ Basic Control Skills                             Page 12-5
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

                     THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.

Section 12 ­ Basic Control Skills                             Page 12-6
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 13                                         If stopping behind another vehicle, stop where you
       On-road Driving                                        can see the rear tires on the vehicle ahead of you
                                                              (safe gap).
This Section Covers                                           Do not let your vehicle roll.
                                                              Keep the front wheels aimed straight ahead.
 How You Will Be Tested
                                                              When ready to turn:
You will drive over a test route that has a variety of        Check traffic in all directions.
traffic situations. At all times during the test, you         Keep both hands on the steering wheel during the
must drive in a safe and responsible manner; and              turn.
you must:                                                     Keep checking your mirror to make sure the
Wear your safety belt.                                        vehicle does not hit anything on the inside of the
Obey all traffic signs, signals, and laws.                    turn.
Complete the test without an accident or moving               Vehicle should not move into oncoming traffic.
violation.                                                    Vehicle should finish turn in correct lane.

During the driving test, the examiner will be scoring         After turn:
you on specific driving maneuvers as well as on               Make sure turn signal is off.
your general driving behavior. You will follow the            Get up to speed of traffic, use turn signal, and
directions of the examiner. Directions will be given          move into right-most lane when safe to do so (if not
to you so you will have plenty of time to do what             already there).
the examiner has asked. You will not be asked to              Check mirrors and traffic.
drive in an unsafe manner.
                                                              13.1.2 ­ Intersections
If your test route does not have certain traffic
situations, you may be asked to simulate a traffic            As you approach an intersection:
situation. You will do this by telling the examiner           Check traffic thoroughly in all directions.
what you are or would be doing if you were in that            Decelerate gently.
traffic situation.                                            Brake smoothly and, if necessary, change gears.
                                                              If necessary, come to a complete stop (no
13.1 ­ How You Will Be Tested                                 coasting) behind any stop signs, signals,
                                                              sidewalks, or stop lines maintaining a safe gap
13.1.1 ­ Turns                                                behind any vehicle in front of you.
                                                              Your vehicle must not roll forward or backward.
You have been asked to make a turn:
Check traffic in all directions.                              When driving through an intersection:
Use turn signals and safely get into the lane                 Check traffic thoroughly in all directions.
needed for the turn.                                          Decelerate and yield to any pedestrians and traffic
                                                              in the intersection.
As you approach the turn:                                     Do not change lanes while proceeding through the
Use turn signals to warn others of your turn.                 intersection.
Slow down smoothly, change gears as needed to                 Keep your hands on the wheel.
keep power, but do not coast unsafely. Unsafe
coasting occurs when your vehicle is out of gear              Once through the intersection:
(clutch depressed or gearshift in neutral) for more           Continue checking mirrors and traffic.
than the length of your vehicle.                              Accelerate smoothly and change gears as
                                                              necessary.
If you must stop before making the turn:
Come to a smooth stop without skidding.                                                                                             Page 13-1
Come to a complete stop behind the stop line,
crosswalk, or stop sign.

Section 13 ­ On-road Driving
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

13.1.3 ­ Urban Business                                       Once stopped:
                                                              Vehicle must be parallel to the curb or shoulder of
During this part of the test, you are expected to             the road and safely out of the traffic flow.
make regular traffic checks and maintain a safe               Vehicle should not be blocking driveways, fire
following distance. Your vehicle should be                    hydrants, intersections, signs, etc.
centered in the proper lane (right-most lane) and             Cancel your turn signal.
you should keep up with the flow of traffic but not           Activate your four-way emergency flashers.
exceed the posted speed limit.                                Apply the parking brake.
                                                              Move the gear shift to neutral or park.
13.1.4 ­Lane Changes                                          Remove your feet from the brake and clutch
                                                              pedals.
During multiple lane portions of the test, you will be
asked to change lanes to the left, and then back to           When instructed to resume:
the right. You should make the necessary traffic              Check traffic and your mirrors thoroughly in all
checks first, then use proper signals and smoothly            directions.
change lanes when it is safe to do so.                        Turn off your four-way flashers.
                                                              Activate the left turn signal.
13.1.5 ­ Expressway or Rural/Limited Access                   When traffic permits, you should release the
Highway                                                       parking brake and pull straight ahead.
                                                              Do not turn the wheel before your vehicle moves.
Before entering the expressway:                               Check traffic from all directions, especially to the
                                                              left.
Check traffic.                                                Steer and accelerate smoothly into the proper lane
                                                              when safe to do so.
Use proper signals.                                           Once your vehicle is back into the flow of traffic,
                                                              cancel your left turn signal.
Merge smoothly into the proper lane of traffic.
                                                              13.1.7 ­ Curve
Once on the expressway:                                       When approaching a curve:
                                                              Check traffic thoroughly in all directions.
Maintain proper lane positioning, vehicle spacing,            Before entering the curve, reduce speed so further
and vehicle speed.                                            braking or shifting is not required in the curve.
                                                              Keep vehicle in the lane.
Continue to check traffic thoroughly in all                   Continue checking traffic in all directions.
directions.
                                                              13.1.8 ­ Railroad Crossing
When exiting the expressway:
                                                              Before reaching the crossing, all commercial
Make necessary traffic checks.                                drivers should:
                                                              Decelerate, brake smoothly, and shift gears as
Use proper signals.                                           necessary.
                                                              Look and listen for the presence of trains.
Decelerate smoothly in the exit lane.                         Check traffic in all directions.

Once on the exit ramp, you must continue to                   Do not stop, change gears, pass another vehicle,
decelerate within the lane markings and maintain              or change lanes while any part of your vehicle is in
adequate spacing between your vehicle and other               the crossing.
vehicles.
                                                                                                                                    Page 13-2
13.1.6 ­ Stop/Start

For this maneuver, you will be asked to pull your
vehicle over to the side of the road and stop as if
you were going to get out and check something on
your vehicle. You must check traffic thoroughly in
all directions and move to the right-most lane or
shoulder of road.

As you prepare for the stop:

Check traffic.

Activate your right turn signal.

Decelerate smoothly, brake evenly, change gears
as necessary.

Bring your vehicle to a full stop without coasting.

Section 13 ­ On-road Driving
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System  Page 13-3

If you are driving a bus, a school bus, or a vehicle
displaying placards, you should be prepared to
observe the following procedures at every railroad
crossing (unless the crossing is exempt):

As the vehicle approaches a railroad crossing,
activate the four-way flashers.

Stop the vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 15
feet from the nearest rail.

Listen and look in both directions along the track
for an approaching train and for signals indicating
the approach of a train. If operating a bus, you may
also be required to open the window and door prior
to crossing tracks.

Keep hands on the steering wheel as the vehicle
crosses the tracks.

Do not stop, change gears, or change lanes while
any part of your vehicle is proceeding across the
tracks.

Four-way flashers should be deactivated after the
vehicle crosses the tracks.

Continue to check mirrors and traffic.

Not all driving road test routes will have a railroad
crossing. You may be asked to explain and
demonstrate the proper railroad crossing
procedures to the examiner at a simulated location.

13.1.9 ­ Bridge/Overpass/Sign

After driving under an overpass, you may be asked
to tell the examiner what the posted clearance or
height was. After going over a bridge, you may be
asked to tell the examiner what the posted weight
limit was. If your test route does not have a bridge
or overpass, you may be asked about another
traffic sign. When asked, be prepared to identify
and explain to the examiner any traffic sign which
may appear on the route.

13.1.10 ­ Student Discharge (School Bus)

If you are applying for a School Bus endorsement,
you will be required to demonstrate a student
discharge. Please refer to section 10 of this
manual.

As you approach the student pick up, you must:
Decelerate and approach at a slow rate of speed
while continuing to check traffic.
Activate amber warning lights and right turn
signals.
Move as far as possible to the right on the traveled
portion of the roadway.
Recheck traffic.

Section 13 ­ On-road Driving
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

As you stop for the student discharge, you must:              13.1.13(c) ­ Brake Usage
Bring school bus to a complete stop at least 10'              Do not ride or pump brake.
away from students at the stop.                               Do not brake harshly. Brake smoothly using steady
Place the transmission in neutral/park and set the            pressure.
parking brake.
Activate the stop arm and red warning lights.                 13.1.14(d) ­ Lane Usage
                                                              Do not put vehicle over curbs, sidewalks, or lane
When discharging students, you must:                          markings.
Communicate to students.                                      Stop behind stop lines, crosswalks, or stop signs.
Check traffic.                                                Complete a turn in the proper lane on a multiple
Open the student door.                                        lane road (vehicle should finish a left turn in the
Check for students.                                           lane directly to the right of the center line).
                                                              Finish a right turn in the right-most (curb) lane.
When students are crossing, you must:                         Move to or remain in right-most lane unless lane is
Check traffic.                                                blocked.
Communicate to students.
Check for students.                                           13.1.15 ­ Steering
                                                              Do not over or under steer the vehicle.
When resuming from the student discharge, you                 Keep both hands on the steering wheel at all times
must:                                                         unless shifting. Once you have completed shift,
Check all mirrors.                                            return both hands to the steering wheel.
Turn off warning lights and stop arm.
Close the door                                                13.1.16 ­ Regular Traffic Checks
Check traffic.                                                Check traffic regularly.
Accelerate away from the stop area.                           Check mirrors regularly.
                                                              Check mirrors and traffic before, while in and after
13.1.11 ­ General Driving Behaviors                           an intersection.
You will be scored on your overall performance in             Scan and check traffic in high volume areas and
the following general driving behavior categories:            areas where pedestrians are expected to be
                                                              present.
13.1.11(a) ­ Clutch Usage (for Manual
Transmission)                                                 13.1.17 ­ Use of Turn Signals
Always use clutch to shift.                                   Use turn signals properly.
You must double-clutch when shifting. Do not rev              Activate turn signals when required.
or lug the engine.                                            Activate turn signals at appropriate times.
Do not ride clutch to control speed, coast with the           Cancel turn signals upon completion of a turn or
clutch depressed, or "pop" the clutch.                        lane change.

13.1.12(b) ­ Gear Usage (for Manual
Transmission)
Do not grind or clash gears.
Select gear that does not rev or lug engine.
Do not shift in turns and intersections.

Section 13 ­ On-road Driving                                  Page 13-4
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Section 13 ­ On-road Driving                                  Page 13-5
Version: July 2014
XXX Copies of this manual were printed by Holley Graphics at a cost of .779 per copy.
                                        REVISED December 2015
