 Commercial
Driver License

    Manual

      2005 CDL Testing System

                  Version: July 2014

                                  CDL Driver's Manual
                            COPYRIGHT © 2005 AAMVA

                                   All Rights Reserved
    This material is based upon work supported by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration under Cooperative Agreement No. DTFH61-97-X-00017. Any opinions,

  findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of
    the Author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the Federal Motor Carrier
                                           Safety Administration.

                                                                    COPYRIGHT © 2005 AAMVA. All rights reserved

This material has been created for and provided to State Driver License Agencies (SDLAs) by AAMVA for the purpose of educating Driver License
applicants (Commercial or Non-Commercial). Permission to reproduce, use, distribute or sell this material has been granted to SDLAs only. No part of
this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system without express written permission from the author / publisher. Any unauthorized reprint, use, distribution or
sale of this material is prohibited.
Human trafficking is modern-day slavery. Traffickers use force, fraud and coercion to control their victims. Any minor
engaged in commercial sex is a victim of human trafficking. Trafficking can occur in many locations, including truck
stops, restaurants, rest areas, brothels, strip clubs, private homes, etc. Truckers are the eyes and the ears of our
nation's highways. If you see a minor working any of those areas or suspect pimp control, call the National Hotline
and report your tip:

                                                      1-888-3737-888 (US)
                                                      1-800-222-TIPS (Canada)

For law enforcement to open an investigation on your tip, they need "actionable information." Specific tips helpful
when reporting to the hotline would include:

     Descriptions of cars (make, model, color, license plate number, etc.) and people (height, weight, hair color,

          eye color, age, etc.)

     Take a picture if you can.
     Specific times and dates (When did you see the event in question take place? What day was it?)
     Addresses and locations where suspicious activity took place

Trafficking Red Flags to Look for:

     Lack of knowledge of their community or whereabouts
     Not in control of own identification documents (ID/passport)
     Restricted or controlled communication--not allowed to speak for self
     Demeanor: fear, anxiety, depression, submissive, tense, nervous

Questions to Ask:

     Are you being paid?
     Are you being watched or followed?
     Are you free to leave? Come and go as you please?
     Are you physically or sexually abused? Are you or your family threatened? What is the nature of the threats?

Report by Email: Report@PolarisProject.org

Warning: Please do not approach traffickers. Call the hotline, and they will call the FBI and local police to deal with
them and rescue the victims. Approaching traffickers is not only dangerous for you and their victims but could lead to
problems in the eventual prosecution of traffickers. Go to www.truckersagainsttrafficking.org for more information.
Who must have a South Dakota Commercial Driver's License?
You must have a South Dakota Commercial Driver License to operate any of the following Commercial Motor Vehicles
(CMV'S):

 A single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 26,001 or more pounds.
 A trailer with a GVWR of 10,001 or more pounds if the gross combination weight rating is 26,001 or more pounds.
 A vehicle designed to transport 16 or more persons (including the driver).
 Any size vehicle which requires hazardous materials placards or is carrying material listed as a select agent or toxin in 42

  CFR Part 73.

Who Does Not Need A South Dakota Commercial Driver License?

 Operators serving in the United States military, operating commercial vehicles in pursuit of military purposes.
 Operators of emergency firefighting equipment necessary to the preservation of life, property, or the execution of

   emergency governmental functions performed under emergency conditions that aren't subject to normal traffic regulation.
 Operators of rental transporting equipment used as personal family use vehicles.
 Operators of recreation vehicles used as personal family recreational use vehicles.
 Operators involved in farm to market transportation movements, at least 18 years of age holding a valid operator's license,

   limited to those operators of a farm vehicle:
         (a) Controlled and operated by a farmer,
         (b) Used to transport either agricultural products, farm machinery, or farm supplies to or from a farm, and
         (c) Not used in the operations of a common or contract motor carrier,
         (d) Used within 150 miles of a person's farm.

 Operators of Covered Farm Vehicles:
       1. Means a straight truck or articulated vehicle
         (a) Registered in the state with a farm license plate or farm sticker issued by the State of registration that allows law
              enforcement officials to identify it as a farm vehicle
         (b) Operated by the owner or operator of a farm or ranch, or an employee or family member of an owner or operator
              of a farm or ranch,
         (c) Used to transport agricultural commodities, livestock, machinery or supplies to or from a farm or ranch,
         (d) Not used in for-hire motor carrier operations; however, for-hire motor carrier operations do not include the
              operation of a vehicle by a tenant pursuant to a crop share farm lease agreement to transport the landlord's
              portion of the crops under that agreement.
         (e) With a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating, whichever is greater, of 26,001 pounds or less may
              utilize the exemptions anywhere in the unites States; or
         (f) With a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating, whichever is greater, of more than 26,001 pounds may
              utilize the exemptions anywhere in the State of registration or across State lines within 150 air miles of the farm or
              ranch with respect to which the vehicle is being operated.

Who Can Not Get A South Dakota Commercial Driver License?

 Persons under the age of 18.
 Persons who have a license under suspension, revocation, cancellation, or disqualification.
 Persons who can't successfully complete licensing requirements under `Driver Application Procedures' of this manual.
 Persons who aren't a resident of South Dakota.
 Persons who have accumulated child support arrearages of $1,000 or more.
 The minimum age to qualify for interstate commerce in a commercial vehicle is 21 years of age.
 The minimum age to qualify for intrastate commerce in a commercial vehicle is 18 years of age.

Knowledge and Specialized Tests
Every driver who wants a CDL must pass the general knowledge test. A driver who does not obtain a passing score on the
general knowledge test cannot be issued a Commercial Learner's Permit or take the skills test. You must have a score of
80% or better to pass each test.

       The General Knowledge Test (taken by all applicants) consists of 50 multiple choice questions.

The Specialized Tests measure the level of knowledge a driver is required to have and are administered based upon the
type of vehicle the applicant wishes to drive and type of cargo to be transported.

       The Air Brakes Test must be taken if your vehicle has air brakes, including air over hydraulic brakes. The test
           consists of 25 multiple choice questions.

       The Combination Vehicles Test is required if you want to drive combination vehicles. The test consists of 20
           multiple choice questions.
      The Passenger Transport Test must be taken by all bus driver applicants. The test consists of 20 multiple choice
          questions.

      The Double/Triples Test is required if you want to pull double or triple trailers. The test consists of 20 multiple
          choice questions.

      The Tank Vehicle Test is required if you want to haul a liquid or liquefied gases in bulk. The test consists of 20
          multiple choice questions.

      The Hazardous Materials Test is required if you want to haul hazardous materials or waste that are required to be
          placarded as defined in 49 CFR 383.5. In order to obtain this endorsement you are also required to pass a
          Transportation Security Administration (TSA) background check and show proof of citizenship or permanent
          residency. The test consists of 30 multiple choice questions.

      The School Bus Test is required by school bus drivers. The test consists of 20 multiple choice questions.

Tests will only be given once per day; to retest you will need to return to an exam station the next business day.

What is Considered a Passing Score?
You must have a score of 80% or better to pass each test.

Commercial Drivers Learner's Permit (CLP)
A commercial learner's permit may be issued to an individual 18 years of age who holds a valid Class 1 or Class 2
operator's license.

The CLP must be valid for no more than 180 days from the date of issuance. The CLP may be renewed once in the 1
year period from the issuance date for an additional 180 days without requiring the CLP holder to retake the general and
specialized knowledge tests.

The holder of a CLP may, unless otherwise disqualified, drive a commercial motor vehicle only if accompanied by the
holder of a CDL, who is 21 years of age, has a valid license for a type of vehicle driven, and occupies a seat beside the
individual or directly behind if in a passenger vehicle for the purpose of giving instruction in driving the commercial motor
vehicle.

A CLP holder with a passenger or school bus endorsement are prohibited from operating a commercial motor vehicle or
school bus carrying passengers. A CLP holder with a tank endorsement may only operate an empty tank vehicle and is
prohibited from operating any tank vehicle that previously contained hazardous materials that has not been purged of any
residue.

A 14 day waiting period is required between the issue date of the CLP and to the date it can be converted to a commercial
driver's license.

Third Party Testing
The State has authorized persons, employers, training facilities, departments, and other agencies to administer the skills
tests. The tests given by the third party are the same as those, which would otherwise be given by the State. For more
information on Third Party Testing please contact:

          State of South Dakota
          Dept. of Public Safety - Driver Licensing
          (605) 773-6883 or 1-800-952-3696 or see a list of Third Party Testers on our website at:
          http://dps.sd.gov

Skills Tests
After passing the required knowledge test(s), you can be issued a commercial learner's permit and then take the CDL skills
tests. The commercial learner's permit must contain all endorsements and restrictions necessary to complete the skills test.
There are three types of general skills that will be tested: pre-trip inspection, basic vehicle control, and on-road driving. You
must take these tests in the type of vehicle for which you wish to be licensed.

Scores for the passed segments of the skills tests are only valid during the initial issuance of the CLP. If the CLP is renewed,
all three segments of the skills test must be retaken.

The third party examiners must schedule tests 2 days in advance.
Pre-trip Vehicle Inspection
Purpose: To see if you know whether the vehicle is safe to drive.

Test Procedure: You will be asked to do a pre-trip inspection of your vehicle and explain to the examiner what you would
inspect and why. The examiner will mark on a scoring form each item that you correctly inspect or explain. This manual tells
you what you need to inspect.

Basic Vehicle Control
Purpose: To evaluate your basic skills in controlling the vehicle.

Set-Up: The test set-up consists of various exercises marked out by lines, traffic cones, or something similar. The exercises
may include moving the vehicle forward, backing, or turning maneuvers.

The examiner will explain to you how each exercise is to be done. You will be scored on how well you stay within the
exercise boundaries and how many pull-ups you make.

Road Test
Purpose: to evaluate your ability to drive safely in a variety of on-the-road situations.

Test Procedure: The test drive is taken over a route specified by the examiner. It may include left and right turns,
intersections, railway crossings, curves, up and down grades, rural or semi-rural roads, city multi-lane streets, and
expressway driving.

You will drive over the test route following instructions given by the examiner. The examiner will score specific tasks such as
turns, merging into traffic, lane changes, and speed control at specific places along the route. The examiner will also score
whether you correctly do tasks such as signaling, searching for hazards, controlling speed, and lane positioning

            DOCUMENT REQUIREMENTS (photo copies are not acceptable)

Renewal of a driver license or ID card (must have a star in upper right corner). If your license or ID doesn't have a star
please follow the directions below for a new license or ID card:

     1. South Dakota driver license or ID card (with star in upper right corner)
     2. Two documents proving your residential address (must be less than one year old)
     3. Non-US citizens and transfers from other states must provide proof of lawful status in the U.S. (such as U.S. certified

          birth certificate, valid U.S. passport/passport card, certificate of citizenship/naturalization, permanent resident card,
          employment authorization card, or foreign passport with visa/I-94)
     4. If your name has changed you will need to provide proof of the name change (marriage certificate, divorce decree, or
          court order)
For information about online renewal (available every other renewal period) go to www.dps.sd.gov

Replacement of a South Dakota driver license or ID card (had a star in upper right corner):
     1. U.S. certified birth certificate, valid U.S. passport/passport card, certificate of citizenship/naturalization, valid
          permanent resident card, valid employment authorization document, or foreign passport with U.S. visa/I-94
     2. Second document proving identity (such as social security card, W-2 form, military ID, tribal ID, or other document
          approved by examiner)
     3. Two documents proving your residential address (must be less than one year old)
     4. Name Change: If you need to change your name from what was on your last license or ID you will need to provide
          proof of the name change (marriage certificate, divorce decree, or court order)

To request a duplicate online (once per renewal period) go to www.dps.sd.gov. Name changes cannot be done online.

New South Dakota driver license or ID card (includes transfer from another state*)
     1. One document proving your date of birth, identity and lawful status or presence. If possible, select a
          document that has your current full legal name to avoid documenting any name change.
      Valid, unexpired U.S. passport or U.S. passport card
      Certified copy of a birth certificate issued by a state of the United States. It must be a certified copy and have the
          stamp or raised seal of the issuing authority. A hospital-issued certificate is not acceptable. A certified birth certificate
          issued by Puerto Rico must be certified as being issued on or after July 1, 2010.
      Consular Report of Birth Abroad issued by the U.S. Department of State (Form FS-240, DS-1350 or FS-545)
      Certificate of Naturalization (Form N-550, N-570 or N-578)
 Certificate of Citizenship (Form N-560, N-561 or N-645)
 Unexpired Permanent Resident Card (Form I-551)
 Unexpired Employment Authorization Document (Form I-766).
 Record of Arrival and Departure (I-94) with attached photo and stamped "Temporary Proof of Lawful Permanent

     Resident"
 Record of Arrival and Departure (I-94) stamped "Refugee," "Parolee" or "Asylee"
 Unexpired foreign passport accompanied by the approved I-94 documenting applicant's most recent admittance into

     the United States
 Valid foreign passport stamped "Processed for I-551"
 Permit to Reenter the United States (I-327)
 Refugee Travel Document (I-571)

*Transfer of a federally compliant driver license or ID from another state requires the documents listed under "Renewal of
a driver license or ID card (must have a star in upper right corner)" above.

2. Check your name. Is your current full legal name different from the name listed on the identity document you are
     providing in step 1? Were you previously issued a South Dakota driver license or ID card with a name different from
     that listed on the identity document in step 1? If you answered yes to one or both of the questions above, you
     must document your name change. If not, go to step 3.

To document your name change, bring documents that connect the name on the identity document you selected to your
current full legal name. Select the documents you will use (this can be more than one if needed to connect the name listed
on your identity document to your current name). Certified marriage certificate

                 Court order under petition for name change
                 Court order for name change in a divorce decree or decree of annulment
                 Court order for name change in a decree of adoption
     Any marriage certificate must be issued by the state office of vital statistics or equivalent agency in your state or
     country of marriage. It must be a certified copy and have the stamp or raised seal of the issuing authority. A church,
     chapel or similarly issued certificate is not acceptable.

Any court order must contain your prior full legal name, your court-ordered full legal name and your date of birth;
and be stamped with the official court seal (date stamps and file stamps are not the official court seal).
Photocopies and faxes are not acceptable.

3. Document your Social Security number (SSN). Select one document you will use that contains your current
     name and SSN. (We are unable to accept any document except what is listed below, including Medicare cards)

 Social Security card (the social security card stub or metal cards are not acceptable)
 W-2 form
 Social Security Administration 1099 form
 Non-Social Security Administration 1099 form
 Pay stub or statement with your name and full Social Security number on it
 I am a temporary foreign national not authorized for employment. (You do not have to document a SSN, but South

     Dakota will verify your USCIS number. Make sure you are not authorized for employment. If you are eligible for
     employment but do not have a SSN, you are required to obtain and present one.

4. Two documents proving your residential address (less than one year old). A parent's proof of address is

acceptable for a minor child.

 Utility bill                                       If you are unable to provide proof of residency

 Pay stub or earnings statement                    please see a list of address exceptions on our

 Rent receipt                                      website at www.dps.sd.gov or call 1-605-773-

 Phone bill                                        6883

 Transcript or report card from accredited school   Mail with post office box addresses are acceptable
 Bank statement                                         in areas not assigned a street or 911 address

 Mortgage document

 Tax document

 Homeowners/rent's insurance policy

 Other items with your address can be reviewed by

the examiner
Veterans
Veterans who have been honorably discharged from the military have the option of adding the word "Veteran" to the front
of their South Dakota driver license or identification card. In addition to the documents listed above, they will need to
present one of the following:

 DD-214 form which shows their honorable discharge status from active duty
 Present a certificate signed by a county or tribal veteran's service officer verifying their status
 DD Form 2 (Retired)
 DD Form 2A (Reserve Retired)

Note to current or new CDL applicants: If you are required to carry a medical examiners certificate (aka DOT medical card)
you must show a valid card at the driver exam station.

If you are unable to obtain any of the required documents please contact our office to see if exceptions are
available:

E-mail:   DPSLicensingInfo@state.sd.us (please include your first and last name)
Phone:
Address:  1-605-773-6883  Website Address: www.dps.sd.gov

          South Dakota Driver Licensing Program, 118 W. Capitol Ave., Pierre, SD 57501
South Dakota Classification System

         1 Car/Truck
         2 Car/Truck/Motorcycle
         3 Motorcycle
         A Combination Vehicle over 26,000
         B Heavy Straight Vehicle over 26,000
         C Commercial Vehicle Under 26,000

South Dakota Endorsements
         (T) Double/Triple Trailers- Many drivers who are qualified to drive Class A vehicles may
         wish to pull double or triple trailers. Research shows that considerable additional knowledge
         and skill is necessary to safely pull double and triple trailers in various traffic conditions and
         driving environments. Consequently, adding the endorsement to the licenses of Class A
         drivers is necessary if they wish to pull double or triple trailers. A special knowledge
         examination on the problems associated with pulling multiple trailers must be passed.
         (P) Passengers- Drivers who wish to drive a vehicle having a design capacity to carry 16 or
         more people, including the driver, must add a passenger endorsement to their CDL. They
         must pass a special knowledge examination on safety considerations when transporting
         passengers and must pass skills tests in a passenger vehicle. The endorsement applies to
         applicants who wish to drive a bus in any class (A, B, or C).
         (N) Tank Vehicles- Drivers of vehicles that are used to haul liquids or gaseous materials in
         permanent tanks having a rating capacity of 450 liters (119 gallons) or in portable tanks
         having a rating capacity of 1,000 gallons or more must have specialized knowledge and skills
         to drive safely. The current regulation [CFR part 383.5 tank vehicle] does not specify the
         rating capacity of permanent tanks. Therefore FMCSA has defined a permanent tank using a
         hazardous materials requirement [CFR part 171.8] that specifies permanent tanks as having
         a rating capacity of 450 liters (119 gallons). Applies to Class A, B and C vehicles. Liquids in
         bulk cause driving control problems because the cargo is heavy, prone to shifting, and has a
         high center of gravity. These drivers must add an endorsement to their license showing they
         have passed a special knowledge examination on the problems posed by large volume liquid
         cargos.
         (H) Hazardous Materials- Any driver, regardless of the class of their vehicle (A, B, or C)
         who wishes to haul hazardous materials or waste in amounts requiring placards must add a
         hazardous materials endorsement to their CDL. S/he must pass a special written examination
         on how to recognize, handle, and transport hazardous materials. Before the endorsement can
         be added to the license the driver must also pass a federal Transportation Security
         Administration background check which includes an application, fingerprinting and fee.
         (X) Combination Tank and Hazardous- Drivers who haul hazardous materials or hazardous
         waste in a tank vehicle must add an X endorsement to their CDL, showing that they have
         passed the special knowledge examinations for both tank vehicles and hazardous materials.
         (S) School Bus- Drivers who wish to drive a school bus, must add a school bus endorsement
         to their CDL. They must pass a special knowledge examination on safety considerations when
         transporting passengers in a school bus and must pass skills tests in a school bus. The
         endorsement applies to applicants who wish to drive a school bus in any class (A, B, or C).

If applying for Hazardous Materials endorsement duplicate or renewal you must provide a
valid U.S. passport, U.S. birth certificate, or Permanent Resident Card.
EFFECTIVE JULY 1st, 2015

Prior to                  SD License Restrictions
July 1,
 2015                     Now Commercial Learner's Permit Restrictions
                            P No passengers in a CMV
   B                        X No cargo in a tank CMV
   J                                   Commercial Driver License Restrictions
   K                        L No air brakes
   W                       M No Class A passenger vehicle
   V                       N No Class A or B passenger vehicle
                           W Seasonal CDL
   O                       V Medical Variance
   R                        E Automatic Transmission (new for CMV)
   G                        K Intrastate only
   F                       O No tractor-trailer CMV
   Q                        Z No Full Air Brake (air over hydraulic brakes)
   E                              Driver License Restrictions
   X                        B Corrective Lenses
   Z                       R Restricted Permit (6AM-10PM)
                           G No night driving
                           F Left outside rearview mirror
                            I No driving outside of town
                           A Automatic Transmission (Non-Commercial)
                            Y 50 mile radius of residence
                            C Special equipped vehicle
License Transfer

When applying to transfer a CLP/CDL from one state of domicile to a new state of domicile, an applicant shall
apply for a CLP/CDL from the new State of domicile within no more than 30 days. The applicant shall:

          Meet document requirements on page iv and v.

           Complete application and provide updated information for the Commercial Driver's License document.
           Surrender the CDL from the old state of domicile.

If an applicant wishes to transfer a hazardous materials endorsement the applicant must:
 Have completed a TSA security threat assessment;
 Successfully complete the hazardous materials endorsement knowledge test;
 Provide proof of citizenship or permanent residency.

License Renewal

When applying for renewal of a CLP/CDL, all applicants shall:
           Meet document requirements on page iv and v.
           Complete application and provide updated information for the CLP/CDL document.

If an applicant wishes to renew hazardous materials endorsement the applicant must:
     a) Have completed a TSA security threat assessment;
     b) Successfully complete the hazardous materials endorsement knowledge test;
     c) Provide proof of citizenship or permanent residency.

License Upgrade

When applying to operate a commercial motor vehicle in a different group or endorsement from the group or
endorsement in which the applicant already has a CDL, all persons shall:

           Provide the necessary certifications,
           Pass all tests specified for the new vehicle group and/or endorsements.

Seasonal Farm-Services CDL

Drivers who are seasonal employees of a farm-related service industry, such as custom harvesters, farm retail
outlet suppliers, agri-chemical businesses, and livestock feeders may be eligible for a "Seasonal/Restricted
Commercial License". The applicant for the "Seasonal CDL" must be 18 years old and have a good driving
record for the two most recent years and must have held a valid operator license for one year (this doesn't
include instruction permits or restricted licenses). Upon meeting these requirements all knowledge and skill
testing will be waived.

A "Seasonal CDL" allows the operator to operate only Class B and C Commercial vehicles within 150 miles from
the place of business or the farm currently being served, and the operator may not drive vehicles carrying any
placarded quantities of hazardous materials, except for the following:

          (1) Diesel fuel in quantities of 1,000 gallons or less,
          (2) Liquid fertilizers, such as plant nutrients, in vehicles or implements of husbandry with total capacities

                of 3,000 gallons or less, and,
          (3) Solid fertilizers, such as solid plant nutrients, that aren't transported with any organic substance.

A "Seasonal CDL" is valid for one 180-day period or two 90-day periods each calendar year.
                           License Expiration

A CDL expires on the licensee's birthday in the fifth year following the issuance of the license. Each license is
renewable 180 days prior to its expiration, unless the applicant is turning twenty-one, in which case their license
expires 30 days after their 21st birthday and they must wait until their birthday to renew their license.

Non-citizens will be issued a "Nonresident CDL" for the duration of their legal stay in the U.S. (not to exceed five
years or, if turning 21, 30 days after their 21st birthday).

Reciprocity

The holder of a valid CDL, which is not suspended, revoked, cancelled, or disqualified, may operate a
commercial motor vehicle in any State, Canada or Mexico.

Fees

The fee for a commercial driver license is $33.00. There is also a $15.00 fee for each endorsement to a
commercial license. A third party tester may charge up to $90.00 plus tax for each attempt to successfully
complete the commercial skills test.

Reinstatement Fee

A person whose license has been revoked, suspended, or disqualified is required by law to pay a license
reinstatement fee of $50.00 to $200.00 plus application fees when he/she is eligible to apply for a new license.
Tests may be required following a revocation, suspension, or disqualification.

For any other Driver License information CALL 1-605-773-6883 or check our website at http://dps.sd.gov.

Imminent Hazardous Disqualification

Upon notification from the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that a driver is an imminent hazard
(FMCSR 383.52)

In Addition While Driving a Commercial Motor Vehicle... if you refuse to submit to the requested chemical
analysis you will be immediately placed out of service for a period of 24 hours and will be disqualified from
operating a commercial motor vehicle for a period of one year under SDCL 32-12A-43 and 32-12A-46. Also, if
your chemical analysis discloses that you have been operating a commercial motor vehicle with an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by weight of alcohol in your blood in violation of SDCL 32-12A-44, your
commercial driver license will be disqualified for a period of one year.

Vehicle Registration and Title

Commercial vehicles are registered at the County Treasurer's office of the applicant's residence. If the vehicle is
being apportioned (prorated), application for registration is made to the Prorate Section of the Division of Motor
Vehicles. Commercial and prorate registrations are valid from January 1 to December 31. A certificate of title is
required to sell or transfer any vehicle. The title should be kept in a safe place, not in the vehicle. The
registration certificate must be carried in the vehicle at all times.

Financial Responsibility

Any operator who has had his license revoked or suspended following a conviction for NO INSURANCE, DWI,
VEHICULAR HOMICIDE, RECKLESS DRIVING (2nd in one-year period), OR A JUDGMENT must establish
proof of financial responsibility (a SR-22 form filed with the state by your auto insurance company) before he may
drive or re-register any vehicle in this State.

Construction and Maintenance Devices

Various traffic control devices are used in construction and maintenance work areas to direct drivers or
pedestrians safely through the work zone and to provide for the safety of the highway workers.

The most commonly used traffic control devices are signs, barricades, drums, cones, tubes, flashing arrow panels,
and flag-persons. Orange is the color for these devices.
Construction and Maintenance Signs
Construction and maintenance signs are used to notify drivers of unusual or potentially dangerous conditions in
or near work areas. Most signs in work areas are diamond shape, but a few are rectangular.

Channelizing Devices
Barricades, vertical panels, drums, cones, and tubes are the most commonly used devices to alert drivers of
unusual or potentially dangerous conditions in highway and street work areas and to guide drivers safely
through the work zone. At night they are often equipped with flashing or steady burn lights.

Barricade         Panel  Cone  Tube  Drum         Barricade

The diagonal stripes on the barricade or vertical panel, guide the driver towards the direction to which traffic is
to pass. Stripes sloping downward to the right means the driver should bear to the right. Conversely, stripes
sloping downward to the left means bear to the left.

Pass to the Left               Pass to the Right

Flashing Arrow Panels

Large flashing or sequencing arrow panels may be used in work zones both day and night to guide drivers into
certain traffic lanes and to inform them that part of the road or street ahead of them is closed.
              Traffic Stop

                            Traffic Proceed

Flag persons

Flag persons are often provided in highway and street work zones to stop, slow, or guide traffic safely through
the area. Flag persons wear orange vests, shirts, or jackets and use stop/slow paddles or red flags to direct
traffic through work zones.

                       **************************************************

  Security Threat Assessment Procedures for Hazardous Materials Endorsement Applicants

New Endorsement: Federal Regulations require anyone applying for a new hazardous materials
endorsement to submit finger prints and obtain a security clearance from the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) prior to the issuance of the commercial driver license containing a hazardous materials
endorsement. To begin these process applicants need to make application and complete the written
hazardous materials test at a South Dakota driver exam station. The next step is to complete the application
for a security threat assessment background check and pay the $86.50 background check fee by either
logging onto https://universalenroll.dhs.gov or by calling 1-855-347-8371. The website or call center can
advise the applicant of the nearest location for fingerprinting. At the fingerprinting site applicants will need to
provide the staff with a receipt from the driver exam station showing the hazardous material endorsement test
was successfully passed and photo identification. When the background check is completed the
Transportation Security Administration will notify both the applicant and the state driver licensing authorities.
At that time the applicant may return to their local driver exam station to be issued a license with the
endorsement.

Renewal or Transfer of Endorsement: Applicants applying for renewal or transfer of a commercial driver
license containing a hazardous materials endorsement are required to obtain a security clearance from TSA.
For renewals or transfers you may start the background check process by applying online and paying the
background check fee of $86.50 at https://universalenroll.dhs.gov or through the call center at 1-855-347-
8371.

All Applicants: Anyone applying for a commercial driver license with a hazardous materials endorsement
must provide proof of citizenship or immigration status. The proof of citizenship or permanent residency must
be presented to the driver license examiner when you make a new application for a hazardous materials
endorsement, transfer or renew your driver license with a hazardous materials endorsement, apply for a
duplicate commercial driver license with a hazardous materials endorsement or reinstate a driver license with
a hazardous materials endorsement.

In order to comply with these requirements, the state of South Dakota requires one of the documents listed
below when you make application at a South Dakota Driver Exam Station for a commercial driver license with
a hazardous materials endorsement. This document is required in addition to any other documents that are
required for proof of identity.

US Citizen: Valid U.S. Passport; Certificate of birth that bears an official seal and was issued by a county,
state, municipal authority, or outlying possession of the United States; Certificate of Birth Abroad issued by the
United States Department of State (Form FS-545 or DS 1350); Certificate of Naturalization (Form N-550 or N-
570); or Certificate of United States Citizenship (Form N-560 or N-561)
Immigration Status Documentation*: Permanent Resident Card, Alien Registration Receipt Card (Form I-551);
Temporary I-551 stamp in Foreign Passport; Temporary I-551 stamp in form I-94, Arrival/Departure Record
with photograph of the bearer; Re-entry Permit Form I-327

All applicants are required to provide their social security number.

If you have a Hazardous Materials endorsement and you do not meet the Hazardous Materials qualification
requirements that follow, you must surrender your commercial driver license to a Driver Exam Station
immediately. When you surrender your commercial driver license you may be issued a commercial driver
license without a Hazardous Materials endorsement if you are otherwise qualified.

See Parts A, B and C below for information on disqualifying criminal offenses. In addition to the disqualifying
criminal offenses listed below, the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) may determine that an
applicant is not eligible for the HME based on analysis of the following:

a) Interpol and other international information, as appropriate.
b) Terrorist watch lists, other government databases and related information.
c) Any other information relevant to determining applicant eligibility or an applicant's identity.
TSA may also determine that an applicant is not eligible if the security threat assessment process reveals
extensive foreign or domestic criminal convictions, a conviction for a serious crime not listed in Part A or B
below (including some lesser included offenses of serious crimes; e.g. Murder/Voluntary Manslaughter), or a
period of foreign or domestic imprisonment that exceeds 365 consecutive days.

TSA may also determine that an applicant is not eligible based on analysis of records related to violations of
transportation security regulatory requirements. These include security-related offenses at an airport, on board
an aircraft, at a maritime port, in connection with air cargo, and other regulatory violations.

PART A: Permanent Disqualifying Criminal Offenses

An applicant will be disqualified if he or she was convicted, pled guilty (including `no contest'), or found not
guilty by reason of insanity for any of the following felonies regardless of when they occurred:

1. Espionage or conspiracy to commit espionage.
2. Sedition or conspiracy to commit sedition.
3. Treason or conspiracy to commit treason.
4. A federal crime of terrorism as defined in 18 U.S.C. 2332b(g), or comparable State law, or conspiracy to
commit such crime.
5. A crime involving a TSI (transportation security incident). Note: A transportation security incident is a
security incident resulting in a significant loss of life, environmental damage, transportation system disruption,
or economic disruption in a particular area, as defined in 46 U.S.C. 70101. The term "economic disruption"
does not include a work stoppage or other employee-related action not related to terrorism and resulting from
an employer-employee dispute.
6. Improper transportation of a hazardous material under 49 U.S.C. 5124 or a comparable state law.
7. Unlawful possession, use, sale, distribution, manufacture, purchase, receipt, transfer, shipping, transporting,
import, export, storage of, or dealing in an explosive or explosive device. An explosive or explosive device
includes an explosive or explosive material as defined in 18 U.S.C. 232(5), 841(c) through 841(f), and 844(j);
and a destructive device, as defined in 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(4) and 26 U.S.C. 5845(f).
8. Murder.
9. Threat or maliciously conveying false information knowing the same to be false, concerning the deliverance,
placement, or detonation of an explosive or other lethal device in or against a place of public use, a state or
government facility, a public transportations system, or an infrastructure facility.
10. Violations of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, 18 U.S.C. 1961, et seq., or a
comparable State law, where one of the predicate acts found by a jury or admitted by the defendant, consists
of one of the permanently disqualifying crimes.
11. Attempt to commit the crimes in items (1)-(4) of this section.
12. Conspiracy or attempt to commit the crimes in items (5)-(10) of this section.
Note: An applicant may apply for a waiver for any disqualifying offense listed under Part A, numbers 5 through
12 listed above.

PART B: Interim Disqualifying Criminal Offenses

Conviction for one of the following felonies is disqualifying if the applicant was convicted, pled guilty (including
`no contest'), or found not guilty by reason of insanity within 7 years of the date of the application; OR if the
applicant was released from prison after conviction within 5 years of the date of the application.

1. Unlawful possession, use, sale, manufacture, purchase, distribution, receipt, transfer, shipping, transporting,
delivery, import, export of, or dealing in a firearm or other weapon. A firearm or other weapon includes, but is
not limited to, firearms as defined in 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(3) or 26 U.S.C. 5 845(a), or items contained on the U.S.
Munitions Import List at 27 CFR 447.21.
2. Extortion.
3. Dishonesty, fraud, or misrepresentation, including identity fraud and money laundering, where the money
laundering is related to a crime listed in Parts A or B (except welfare fraud and passing bad checks).
4. Bribery.
5. Smuggling.
6. Immigration violations.
7. Distribution, possession w/ intent to distribute, or importation of a controlled substance.
8. Arson.
9. Kidnapping or hostage taking.
10. Rape or aggravated sexual abuse.
11. Assault with intent to kill.
12. Robbery.
13. Fraudulent entry into a seaport as described in 18 U.S.C. 1036, or a comparable State law.
14. Violations of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) under 18 U.S.C. 1961, et
seq., or a comparable State law, other than any permanently disqualifying offenses.
15. Voluntary Manslaughter.
16. Conspiracy or attempt to commit crimes in this section.
Note: An applicant may apply for a waiver for any disqualifying offense listed under Part B.

PART C: Under Want, Warrant or Indictment
A person will be disqualified if he or she is wanted or under indictment in any civilian or military jurisdiction for
a felony listed under Part A or Part B until the want or warrant is released or the indictment is dismissed.
Application Process

1. Complete the application for a security threat assessment background check by either logging onto
     https://universalenroll.dhs.gov or by calling 1-855-347-8371. There is an $86.50 background check fee
     that will need to be paid upon application.

2. Fingerprinting. Contact one of the following fingerprinting sites for an appointment. You must provide
     the fingerprinting site with identification (a state-issued driver license or identification card):

EMSI Sioux Falls         Right Turn Inc.
2221 Russell Street      124 East Dakota Ave
Sioux Falls, SD 57104    Pierre, SD 57501
Hours: Monday - Friday   Hours: Wednesday
8:30am ­ 4:30 pm         1pm -5pm
Preferred Appointments   Preferred Appointments
605-728-5999             605-773-4755

TekNetCorp
1727 W Main St Suite 4
Rapid City, SD 57702
Hours: Wednesday
10am-2pm
Preferred Appointments:
605-716-6582

Issuance of CDL with Hazardous Material Endorsement

When the background check is completed the Transportation Security Administration will notify both the
applicant and the state driver licensing authorities. At that time the applicant may return to their local driver
exam station, with proof of citizenship and proof of identity, to be issued a license with the endorsement.

All applicants for a hazardous material endorsement must complete a knowledge exam to obtain the
endorsement.

Hazardous Material Regulations (HMR) and regulations for CDL operation are found in Title 42 CFR part 1003 and Title 49
CFR parts 100 to 185 and 300 to 399. You can purchase a copy of the Code of Federal Regulations through your local
Government Printing Office bookstore and various industry publishers. Company offices often have copies of the rules for
sale or driver use.
Information is also available on the Transportation Security Administration's website at www.tsa.gov. Individuals and
operators with questions about the Patriot Act rule can e-mail patriotact@dhs.gov
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
                            Table of Contents

Introduction .........................................................................................................................................1-1
Driving Safely ...................................................................................................................................2-1
Transporting Cargo Safely ...............................................................................................3-1
Transporting Passengers Safely...............................................................................4-1
Air Brakes .............................................................................................................................................5-1
Combination Vehicles ............................................................................................................6-1
Doubles and Triples .................................................................................................................7-1
Tank Vehicles ..................................................................................................................................8-1
Hazardous Materials................................................................................................................9-1
School Bus ........................................................................................................................................10-1
Vehicle Inspection.....................................................................................................................11-1
Basic Vehicle Control Skills Test............................................................................12-1
On-Road Driving.........................................................................................................................13-1
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

    Section 1
INTRODUCTION

This Section Covers                                                                      Figure 1.1

 Commercial Driver License Tests                              NOTE: A bus may be Class A, B, or C depending on whether
 Medical Requirements                                                      the GVWR is over 26,001 pounds or is a combination
 Driver Disqualifications                                                  vehicle.
 Other Safety Rules
 International Registration Program

There is a federal requirement that each state have
minimum standards for the licensing of commercial
drivers.

This manual provides driver license testing
information for drivers who wish to have a
commercial driver license (CDL). This manual does
NOT provide information on all the federal and
state requirements needed before you can drive a
commercial motor vehicle (CMV). You may have to
contact your state driver licensing authority for
additional information.

You must have a CDL to operate:

Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) of 26,001 pounds or more.

A combination vehicle with a gross combination
weight rating (GCWR) of 26,001 or more pounds,
provided the GVWR of the vehicle(s) being towed is
in excess of 10,000 pounds.

A vehicle designed to transport 16 or more
passengers (including the driver).

Any size vehicle which requires hazardous material
placards or is carrying material listed as a select
agent or toxin in 42 CFR part 73. Federal
regulations through the Department of Homeland
Security require a background check and
fingerprinting for the Hazardous Materials
endorsement. Contact your local department of
driver licensing for more information.

(Your state may have additional definitions of
CMVs.)

To get a CDL, you must pass knowledge and skills
tests. This manual will help you pass the tests,
however, it is not a substitute for a truck driver
training class or program. Formal training is the
most reliable way to learn the many special skills
required for safely driving a large commercial
vehicle and becoming a professional driver in the
trucking industry. Figure 1.1 helps you determine if
you need a CDL

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-1
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

1.1 ­ Commercial Driver License Tests                         similar. The examiner will tell you how each control
                                                              test is to be done.
1.1.1 ­ Knowledge Tests
                                                              On-road Test. You will be tested on your skill to
You will have to take one or more knowledge tests,            safely drive your vehicle in a variety of traffic
depending on what class of license and what                   situations. The situations may include left and right
endorsements you need. The CDL knowledge                      turns, intersections, railroad crossings, curves, up
tests include:                                                and down grades, single or multi-lane roads,
                                                              streets, or highways. The examiner will tell you
The general knowledge test, taken by all                      where to drive.
applicants.
                                                              Figure 1.2 details which sections of this manual
The passenger transport test, taken by all bus                you should study for each particular class of
driver applicants.                                            license and for each endorsement.

The air brakes test, which you must take if your              What Sections Should You Study?
vehicle has air brakes, including air over hydraulic
brakes.                                                           LICENSE  ENDORSEMENT
                                                                  TYPE
The combination vehicles test, which is required
if you want to drive combination vehicles.                                                                                     School Bus
                                                                                                                       Passenger
The hazardous materials test, required if you                                                                   Tank Vehicles
want to haul hazardous materials as defined in 49                                                        Double / Triple
CFR 383.5. In order to obtain this endorsement                                                     Hazardous
you are also required to pass a Transportation                                                  Materials
Security Administration (TSA) background check.                                           Class C
                                                                                   Class B
The tank vehicle test, required if you want to haul                         Class A
any liquid or gaseous materials in a tank or tanks
having an individual rated capacity of more than              Sections to Study
119 gallons and an aggregate rated capacity of                1XXX
1,000 gallons or more that is either permanently or
temporarily attached to the vehicle or chassis                2XXX            XXX

The doubles/triples test, required if you want to             3XXX
pull double or triple trailers.
                                                              4                                   X
The School Bus test, required if you want to drive
a school bus.                                                 5* X X X        X

1.1.2 ­ Skills Tests                                          6X              XX
If you pass the required knowledge test(s), you can
take the CDL skills tests. There are three types of           7               X
general skills that will be tested: Vehicle inspection,
basic vehicle control, and on-road driving. You               8                                X
must take these tests in the type of vehicle for
which you wish to be licensed. Any vehicle that               9            X                   X
has components marked or labeled cannot be
used for the Vehicle Inspection Test.                         10                                     X

Vehicle Inspection. You will be tested to see if              11 X X X                            XX
you know whether your vehicle is safe to drive.
You will be asked to do a Vehicle inspection of               12 X X X                            XX
your vehicle and explain to the examiner what you
would inspect and why.                                        13 X X X                            XX

Basic Vehicle Control. You will be tested on your             *Study section 5 if you plan to operate vehicles
skill to control the vehicle. You will be asked to            equipped with air brakes.
move your vehicle forward, backward, and turn it
within a defined area. These areas may be marked                             Figure 1.2 ­ What to Study
with traffic lanes, cones, barriers, or something

Section 1 - Introduction                                                                          Page 1-2
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

1.2 ­ Medical Documentation                                   1.2.2 ­ Inter/Intrastate Commerce: Status Non-
Requirements                                                  excepted or Excepted?

Starting January 30, 2012 and no later than                   Once you decide whether you will operate in
January 30, 2014, if you are applying for a CDL               interstate commerce or intrastate commerce,
Permit; or are renewing, upgrading, adding                    you must decide whether you will operate (or
endorsements to a CDL; or transferring a CDL                  expect to operate) in a non-excepted or excepted
from another state, you are required to provide               status. This decision will tell you to which of the
information to your State Driver's License Agency             four types of commerce you must self-certify.
(SDLA) regarding the type of commercial motor
vehicle operation you drive in or expect to drive in          Interstate Commerce:
with your CDL. Drivers operating in certain types of
commerce will be required to submit a current                 You operate in excepted interstate commerce
medical examiner's certificate and/or any medical             when you drive a CMV in interstate commerce only
variance documents that you have been issued                  for the following excepted activities:
(i.e. Vision, Skills Performance or Diabetic waivers,
or other exemptions) to your SDLA to obtain a                 To transport school children and/or school staff
"certified" medical status as part of your driving            between home and school;
record. You must contact your State Driver
Licensing Agency (SDLA) to obtain information                 As Federal, State or local government employees;
regarding the requirement for submitting these
documents.                                                    To transport human corpses or sick or injured
                                                              persons;
If you are required to have a "certified" medical
status and fail to provide and keep up-to-date your           Fire truck or rescue vehicle drivers during
medical examiner's certificate you become "not-               emergencies and other related activities;
certified" and may lose your CDL.
                                                              Primarily in the transportation of propane winter
For the purpose of complying with the new                     heating fuel when responding to an emergency
requirements for medical certification, it is                 condition requiring immediate response such as
important to know how you are using the CMV.                  damage to a propane gas system after a storm or
The following information will help you decide how            flooding;
to self-certify:
                                                              In Response to a pipeline emergency condition
1.2.1 ­ Interstate or Intrastate Commerce                     requiring immediate response such as a pipeline
                                                              leak or rupture;
Do you, or will you, use a CDL to operate a CMV in
interstate or intrastate commerce?                            In custom harvesting on a farm or to transport farm
                                                              machinery and supplies used in the custom
Interstate commerce is when you drive a CMV:                  harvesting operation to and from a farm or to
                                                              transport custom harvested crops to storage or
From one State to another State or a foreign                  market;
country;
                                                              Beekeeper in the seasonal transportation of bees;
Between two places within a State, but during part
of the trip, the CMV crosses into another State or            Controlled and operated by a farmer, but is not a
foreign country; or                                           combination vehicle (power unit and towed unit),
                                                              and is used to transport agricultural products, farm
Between two places within a State, but the cargo              machinery or farm supplies (no placardable
or passengers are part of a trip that began or will           hazardous materials) to and from a farm and within
end in another State or foreign country.                      150 air-miles of the farm;

Intrastate commerce is when you drive a CMV                   As a private motor carrier of passengers for non-
within a State and you do not meet any of the                 business purposes ; or
descriptions above for interstate commerce.
                                                              To transport migrant workers.
If you operate in both intrastate commerce and
interstate commerce, you must choose interstate               If you answered yes to one or more of the above
commerce.                                                     activities as the only operation in which you drive,
                                                              you operate in excepted interstate commerce
                                                              and do not need a Federal medical examiner's
                                                              certificate.

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-3
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System   Intrastate non-excepted: I certify that I
                                                                   operate or expect to operate entirely in
If you answered no to all of the above activities,                 intrastate commerce, that I am subject to and
you operate in non-excepted interstate                             meet the medical requirements for my State;
commerce and are required to provide a current                     and that I am required to obtain a medical
medical examiner's certificate (49 CFR                             examiner's certificate.
391.45),commonly referred to as a medical
certificate or DOT card, to your State Driver                  Intrastate excepted: I certify that I operate or
Licensing Agency (SDLA). Most CDL holders who                      expect to operate entirely in intrastate
drive CMVs in interstate commerce are non-                         commerce, that I am not subject to the medical
excepted interstate commerce drivers.                              requirements for my State; and that I am not
                                                                   required to obtain a medical examiner's
If you operate in both excepted interstate                         certificate.
commerce and non-excepted interstate
commerce, you must choose non-excepted                        1.3 - CDL Disqualifications
interstate commerce to be qualified to operate in
both types of interstate commerce.                            1.3.1 ­ General

Intrastate Commerce:                                          You may not drive a commercial motor vehicle if
                                                              you are disqualified for any reason.
You operate in excepted Intrastate commerce
when you drive a CMV only in intrastate commerce              1.3.2 ­ Alcohol, Leaving the Scene of an
activities for which your State of licensure has              Accident, and Commission of a Felony
determined do not require you to meet the State's
medical certification requirements. (contact your             It is illegal to operate a CMV if your blood alcohol
SDLA about their requirements).                               concentration (BAC) is .04% or more. If you
                                                              operate a CMV, you shall be deemed to have
You operate in non-excepted intrastate                        given your consent to alcohol testing.
commerce when you drive a CMV only in
intrastate commerce and are required to meet your             You will lose your CDL for at least one year for a
State of licensure's medical certification                    first offense for:
requirements (contact your SDLA about their                   Driving a CMV if your blood alcohol concentration
requirements).                                                is .04% or higher.
                                                              Driving a CMV under the influence of alcohol.
If you operate in both excepted intrastate                    Refusing to undergo blood alcohol testing.
commerce and non-excepted intrastate                          Driving a CMV while under the influence of a
commerce, you must choose non-excepted                        controlled substance.
intrastate commerce.                                          Leaving the scene of an accident involving a CMV.
                                                              Committing a felony involving the use of a CMV.
1.2.3 ­ Self-Certification Statements                         Driving a CMV when the CDL is suspended.
                                                              Causing a fatality through negligent operation of a
When completing an application for your CDL, you              CMV.
will be required to check the box next to the
statement that describes your status. The actual              You will lose your CDL for at least three years if
statements on your application may vary from                  the offense occurs while you are operating a CMV
those shown below:                                            that is placarded for hazardous materials.

 Interstate non-excepted: I certify that I                    You will lose your CDL for life for a second offense.
     operate or expect to operate in interstate
     commerce, that I am subject to and meet the              You will lose your CDL for life if you use a CMV to
     Federal DOT medical card requirements under              commit a felony involving controlled substances.
     49 CFR part 391; and that I am required to
     obtain a medical examiner's certificate.

 Interstate excepted: I certify that I operate or
     expect to operate in interstate commerce, but
     engage exclusively in transportation or
     operations excepted under 49 CFR §§390.3(f),
     391.2, 391.68 or 398.3 from all or parts of the
     qualification requirements of 49 CFR part 391;
     and that I am not required to obtain a medical
     examiner's certificate.

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-4
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

You will be put out-of-service for 24 hours if you            For drivers who are not required to always stop,
have any detectable amount of alcohol under                   failing to slow down and check that the tracks are
.04%.                                                         clear of an approaching train.

1.3.3 ­ Serious Traffic Violations                            For drivers who are always required to stop, failing
                                                              to stop before driving onto the crossing.
Serious traffic violations are excessive speeding
(15 mph or more above the posted limit), reckless             For all drivers failing to have sufficient space to
driving, improper or erratic lane changes, following          drive completely through the crossing without
a vehicle too closely, traffic offenses committed in          stopping.
a CMV in connection with fatal traffic accidents,
driving a CMV without obtaining a CDL or having a             For all drivers failing to obey a traffic control device
CDL in the driver's possession, and driving a CMV             or the directions of an enforcement official at the
without the proper class of CDL and/or                        crossing.
endorsements.
                                                              For all drivers failing to negotiate a crossing
                                                              because of insufficient undercarriage clearance.

You will lose your CDL:                                       1.3.6 ­ Hazardous Materials Endorsement
                                                              Background Check and Disqualifications
For at least 60 days if you have committed two
serious traffic violations within a three-year period         If you require a hazardous materials endorsement
involving a CMV.                                              you will be required to submit your fingerprints and
                                                              be subject to a background check.
For at least 120 days for three or more serious
traffic violations within a three-year period involving       You will be denied or you will lose your hazardous
a CMV.                                                        materials endorsement if you:

1.3.4 ­ Violation of Out-of-Service Orders                    Are not a lawful permanent resident of the United
                                                              States.
You will lose your CDL:
                                                              Renounce your United States citizenship.
For at least 90 days if you have committed your
first violation of an out-of-service order.                   Are wanted or under indictment for certain felonies.

For at least one year if you have committed two               Have a conviction in military or civilian court for
violations of an out-of-service order in a ten-year           certain felonies.
period.
                                                              Have been adjudicated as a mental defective or
For at least three years if you have committed                committed to a mental institution.
three or more violations of an out-of-service order
in a ten-year period.                                         Are considered to pose a security threat as
                                                              determined by the Transportation Security
1.3.5 ­ Railroad-highway Grade Crossing                       Administration.
Violations
                                                              The background check procedures vary from
You will lose your CDL:                                       jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Your licensing agency
                                                              will provide you with all the information you need to
For at least 60 days for your first violation.                complete the required TSA background check
                                                              procedures.
For at least 120 days for your second violation
within a three-year period.                                   1.3.7 ­ Traffic Violations in Your Personal
                                                              Vehicle
For at least one year for your third violation within a
three-year period.                                            The Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act
                                                              (MCSIA) of 1999 requires a CDL holder to be
These violations include violation of a federal, state        disqualified from operating a commercial motor
or local law or regulation pertaining to one of the           vehicle if the CDL holder has been convicted of
following six offenses at a railroad-highway grade            certain types of moving violations in their personal
crossing:                                                     vehicle.

For drivers who are not required to always stop,
failing to stop before reaching the crossing if the
tracks are not clear.

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-5
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

If your privilege to operate your personal vehicle is         Your employer may not let you drive a commercial
revoked, cancelled, or suspended due to violations            motor vehicle if you have more than one license or
of traffic control laws (other than parking violations)       if you're CDL is suspended or revoked. A court
you will also lose your CDL driving privileges.               may fine the employer up to $5,000 or put him/her
                                                              in jail for breaking this rule.
If your privilege to operate your personal vehicle is
revoked, cancelled, or suspended due to alcohol,              All states are connected to one computerized
controlled substance or felony violations, you will           system to share information about CDL drivers.
lose your CDL for 1 year. If you are convicted of a           The states will check on drivers' accident records
second violation in your personal vehicle or CMV              to be sure that drivers do not have more than one
you will lose your CDL for life.                              CDL.

If your license to operate your personal vehicle is           You are not allowed to hold a mobile telephone to
revoked, cancelled, or suspended you may not                  conduct a voice communication or dial a mobile
obtain a "hardship" license to operate a CMV.                 telephone by pressing more than a single button
                                                              when driving.
1.4 ­ Other CDL Rules
                                                              You are not allowed to send or read text messages
There are other federal and state rules that affect           while driving.
drivers operating CMVs in all states. Among them
are:                                                          You must be properly restrained by a safety belt at
                                                              all times while operating a commercial motor
You cannot have more than one license. If you                 vehicle. The safety belt design holds the driver
break this rule, a court may fine you up to $5,000            securely behind the wheel during a crash, helping
or put you in jail and keep your home state license           the driver to control the vehicle and reduces the
and return any others.                                        chance of serious injury or death. If you do not
                                                              wear a safety belt, you are four times more likely to
You must notify your employer within 30 days of               be fatally injured if you are thrown from the vehicle.
conviction for any traffic violations (except parking).
This is true no matter what type of vehicle you               Your state may have additional rules that you must
were driving.                                                 also obey.

You must notify your motor vehicle licensing                  1.5 ­ International Registration Plan
agency within 30 days if you are convicted in any                    International Fuel Tax Agreement
other jurisdiction of any traffic violation (except
parking). This is true no matter what type of vehicle         If you operate a CDL required vehicle in interstate
you were driving.                                             commerce, the vehicle, with few exceptions, is
                                                              required to be registered under the International
You must notify your employer within two business             Registration Plan (IRP) and the International Fuel
days if your license is suspended, revoked, or                Tax Agreement (IFTA). These federally mandated
canceled, or if you are disqualified from driving.            programs provide for the equitable collection and
                                                              distribution of vehicle license fees and motor fuels
You must give your employer information on all                taxes for vehicles traveling throughout the 48
driving jobs you have held for the past 10 years.             contiguous United States and 10 Canadian
You must do this when you apply for a commercial              provinces.
driving job.
                                                              Under the IRP, jurisdictions must register
No one can drive a commercial motor vehicle                   apportioned vehicles which includes issuing
without a CDL. A court may fine you up to $5,000              license plates and cab cards or proper credentials,
or put you in jail for breaking this rule.                    calculate, collect and distribute IRP fees, audit
                                                              carriers for accuracy of reported distance and fees
If you have a hazardous materials endorsement                 and enforce IRP requirements.
you must notify and surrender your hazardous
materials endorsement to the state that issued
your CDL within 24 hours of any conviction or
indictment in any jurisdiction, civilian or military, for,
or found not guilty by reason of insanity of a
disqualifying crime listed in 49 CFR 1572.103; who
is adjudicated as a mental defective or committed
to a mental institution as specified in 49 CFR
1572.109; or who renounces his or her U. S.
citizenship;

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-6
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

Registrant responsibilities under the Plan include             (iv) is used in combination, when the gross
applying for IRP registration with base jurisdiction,               Vehicle weight of such combination exceeds
providing proper documentation for registration,                    26,000 pounds (11,793.401 kilograms).
paying appropriate IRP registration fees, properly
displaying registration credentials, maintaining              While similar, the Qualified Motor Vehicle in IFTA
accurate distance records, and making records                 means a motor vehicle used, designed, or
available for jurisdiction review.                            maintained for transportation of persons or
                                                              property and:
The basic concept behind IFTA is to allow a
licensee (motor carrier) to license in a base                   1) Having two axles and a gross vehicle weight
jurisdiction for the reporting and payment of motor                   or registered gross vehicle weight exceeding
fuel use taxes.                                                       26,000 pounds or 11,797 kilograms; or
Under the IFTA, a licensee is issued one set of
credentials which will authorize operations through             2) Is used in combination, when the weight of
all IFTA member jurisdictions. The fuel use taxes                     such combination exceeds 26,000 pounds or
collected pursuant to the IFTA are calculated                         11,797 kilograms gross vehicle or registered
based on the number of miles (kilometers) traveled                    gross vehicle weight. Qualified Motor
and the number of gallons (liters) consumed in the                    Vehicle does not include recreational
member jurisdictions. The licensee files one                          vehicles.
quarterly tax return with the base jurisdiction by
which the licensee will report all operations through           If the vehicle you operate is registered under IRP
all IFTA member jurisdictions.                                  and you are a motor carrier licensed under IFTA,
                                                                then you are required to comply with the
It is the base jurisdiction's responsibility to remit           mandatory record keeping requirements for
the taxes collected to other member jurisdictions               operating the vehicle. A universally accepted
and to represent the other member jurisdictions in              method of capturing this information is through
the tax collection process, including the                       the completion of an Individual Vehicle Distance
performance of audits.                                          Record (IVDR), sometimes times referred to as a
                                                                Driver Trip Report. This document reflects the
An IFTA licensee must retain records to support                 distance traveled and fuel purchased for a
the information reported on the IFTA quarterly tax              vehicle that operates interstate under
return                                                          apportioned (IRP) registration and IFTA fuel tax
                                                                credentials.
The IRP registrant and the IFTA licensee may
be the vehicle owner or the vehicle operator.                 Although the actual format of the IVDR may vary, the
                                                              information that is required for proper record keeping
The requirement for acquiring IRP plates for a                does not.
vehicle and IFTA license for a motor carrier is
determined by the definitions from the IRP Plan               In order to satisfy the requirements for Individual
and the IFTA for Qualified Vehicle and Qualified              Vehicle Distance Records, these documents must
Motor Vehicle:                                                include the following information:

For purposes of IRP:                                          Distance

A Qualified Vehicle is (except as provided below)             Per Article IV of the IRP Plan
any Power Unit that is used or                                    (i) Date of trip (starting and ending)
intended for use in two or more Member                            (ii) Trip origin and destination ­ City and State
Jurisdictions and that is used for the transportation             or Province
of persons for hire or designed, used, or                         (iii) Route(s) of travel
maintained primarily for the transportation of                    (iv) Beginning and ending odometer or
property, and:                                                         hubometer reading of the trip
                                                                  (v) Total distance traveled
 (i) has two Axles and a gross Vehicle weight or                  (vi) In-Jurisdiction distance
      registered gross Vehicle weight in                          (vii) Power unit number or vehicle identification
                                                                        number.
 (ii) excess of 26,000 pounds (11,793.401
      kilograms), or                                          Fuel

 (iii) has three or more Axles, regardless of weight,         Per Section P560 of the IFTA Procedures Manual
      or                                                      .300 An acceptable receipt or invoice must
                                                              include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

                                                                  .005 Date of purchase
                                                                  .010 Seller's name and address

Section 1 - Introduction                                      Page 1-7
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

    .015 Number of gallons or liters purchased;               By completing this document in full and keeping all
    .020 Fuel type                                            records required by both the IRP and the IFTA, you
    .025 Price per gallon or liter or total amount of         will have ensured that you and your company are
                                                              in compliance with all State and Provincial laws
           sale                                               surrounding fuel and distance record keeping
    .030 Unit number or other unique vehicle                  requirements.

           identifier                                         The IVDR serves as the source document for the
    .035 Purchaser's name                                     calculation of fees and taxes that are payable to
                                                              the jurisdictions in which the vehicle is operated, so
An example of an IVDR that must be completed in               these original records must be maintained for a
its entirety for each trip can be found in Figure 1           minimum of four years.
below. Each individual IVDR should be filled out
for only one vehicle. The rules to follow when                In addition, these records are subject to audit by
trying to determine how and when to log an                    the taxing jurisdictions. Failure to maintain
odometer reading are the following:                           complete and accurate records could result in
                                                              fines, penalties and suspension or revocation of
      At the beginning of the day                             IRP registrations and IFTA licenses.
      When leaving the state or province
      At the end of the trip/day                              For additional information on the IRP and the
                                                              requirements related to the IRP, contact your base
Not only do the trips need to be logged, but the fuel         jurisdiction motor vehicle department or IRP, Inc.
purchases need to be documented as well. You                  the official repository for the IRP. Additional
must obtain a receipt for all fueling and include it with     information can be found on the IRP, Inc. website
your completed IVDR.                                          at www.irponline.org. There is a training video on
                                                              the website home page available in English,
Make sure that any trips that you enter are always            Spanish and French
filled out in descending order and that your trips
include all state/provinces that you traveled through
on your route.

There are different routes that a driver may take,            For additional information on IFTA and the
and most of the miles may be within one state or              requirements related to IFTA, contact the
province. Whether or not the distance you travel is           appropriate agency in your base jurisdiction. You
primarily in one jurisdiction or spread among                 will also find useful information about the
several jurisdictions, all information for the trip           Agreement at the official repository of IFTA at
must be recorded. This includes the dates, the                http://www.iftach.org/index.php.
routes, odometer readings and fuel purchases.

                          Figure 1 ­ Individual Vehicle Mileage & Fuel Record (Example)

Section 1 - Introduction                                                                 Page 1-8
Version: July 2014
Commercial Driver's License Manual ­ 2005 CDL Testing System

           Section 2                                          breakdown on the road that will cost time and
      DRIVING SAFELY                                          dollars, or even worse, a crash caused by the
                                                              defect.
This Section Covers
                                                              Federal and state laws require that drivers inspect
 Vehicle Inspection                                           their vehicles. Federal and state inspectors also
 Basic Control of Your Vehicle                                may inspect your vehicles. If they judge the vehicle
 Shifting Gears                                               to be unsafe, they will put it "out of service" until it
 Seeing                                                       is fixed.
 Communicating
 Space Management                                             2.1.2 ­ Types of Vehicle Inspection
 Controlling Your Speed
 Seeing Hazards                                               Vehicle Inspection. A Vehicle inspection will help
 Distracted Driving                                           you find problems that could cause a crash or
 Aggressive Drivers/Road Rage                                 breakdown.
 Night Driving & Driver Fatigue
 Driving in Fog                                               During a Trip. For safety you should:
 Winter Driving
 Hot Weather Driving                                          Watch gauges for signs of trouble.
 Railroad-highway Crossings
 Mountain Driving                                             Use your senses to check for problems (look,
 Driving Emergencies                                          listen, smell, feel).
 Antilock Braking Systems
 Skid Control and Recovery                                    Check critical items when you stop:
 Accident Procedures                                          Tires, wheels and rims.
 Fires                                                        Brakes.
 Alcohol, Other Drugs, and Driving                            Lights and reflectors.
 Hazardous Materials Rules                                    Brake and electrical connections to trailer.
                                                              Trailer coupling devices.
This section contains knowledge and safe driving              Cargo securement devices.
information that all commercial drivers should
know. You must pass a test on this information to             After-trip Inspection and Report. You should do
get a CDL. This section does not have specific                an after-trip inspection at the end of the trip, day, or
information on air brakes, combination vehicles,              tour of duty on each vehicle you operated. It may
doubles, or passenger vehicles. When preparing                include filling out a vehicle condition report listing
for the Vehicle Inspection Test, you must review              any problems you find. The inspection report helps
the material in Section 11 in addition to the                 a motor carrier know when the vehicle needs
information in this section. This section does have           repairs.
basic information on hazardous materials (HazMat)
that all drivers should know. If you need a HazMat            2.1.3 ­ What to Look For
endorsement, you should study Section 9.
                                                              Tire Problems
2.1 ­ Vehicle Inspection
                                                              Too much or too little air pressure.
2.1.1 ­ Why Inspect
                                                              Bad wear. You need at least 4/32-inch tread depth
Safety is the most important reason you inspect               in every major groove on front tires. You need 2/32
your vehicle, safety for yourself and for other road          inch on other tires. No fabric should show through
users.                                                        the tread or sidewall.
A vehicle defect found during an inspection could
save you problems later. You could have a                     Cuts or other damage.

                                                              Tread separation.

                                                              Dual tires that come in contact with each other or
                                                              parts of the vehicle.

                                                              Mismatched sizes.

                                                              Radial and bias-ply tires used together.

                                                              Cut or cracked valve stems.

                                                              Re-grooved, recapped, or retreaded tires on the
                                                              front wheels of a bus are prohibited.

Section 2 ­ Driving Safely                                    Page 2-1
