 
 Commercial Driver License General Information | Department of Revenue - Motor Vehicle 
 Skip to main content
 Scam messages alert! The Colorado DMV will not send unsolicited texts demanding payment or personal information. DO NOT reply or click any links. Click here for more information . 
 Search 
 Search 
 Menu 
 myDMV Online Services
 Appointments
 Driver/ID Services
 Vehicle Services
 New to Colorado
 Required Documents
 Forms
 Locations
 Toggle Locations submenu 
 State / County DMVs
 Contact Us
 Toggle Contact Us submenu 
 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accommodations
 DMV Newsroom
 ADA Digital Services Request
 Anti-Discrimination Policy
 0
 Home 
 Commercial Driver License General Information 
Commercial Driver License General Information
 QUICK LINKS 
 Do I Need a CDL 
 CLP/CDL Process 
 Renewals 
 Vets-2-Trucks 
 FAQs 
 Resources 
 Find information about obtaining and maintaining a Commercial Driver License (CDL) in Colorado. 
 Do I Need a Commercial Driver License (CDL)? 
 When is a Valid CDL Required?
 Any commercial motor vehicle with a Gross Vehicle Weight Range (GVWR) of 26,001 pounds or heavier. Any commercial vehicle that is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver. Any vehicle transporting hazardous material and is required to be placarded in accordance with 49 CFR Part 172, Subpart F. 
 When is a Valid CDL Not Required?
 Recreational vehicles, such as a motorhome Military vehicles driven by military service members Firefighting equipment Emergency snow plows in use during emergency snow removal operations Farm vehicles, when controlled and operated by a farmer within 150 miles of their farm 
 Getting a Commercial Learner's Permit (CLP) and CDL 
 Learn about how to obtain your first CDL in Colorado. 
 Step 1: Verify Eligibility & Gather Documents
 Before starting, ensure you meet the following baseline requirements: Lawful Presence: U.S. Citizens or Permanent Residents only.  Valid License: You must hold a valid Colorado driver license or a valid out-of-state CDL (for transfers)  Age: You must be 18+ (21+ required for hazardous material endorsements). Hazmat Endorsement Information Before applying for or renewing a CDL license with a hazardous material endorsement, applicants must complete a background check application online or by phone through the TSA. Click here to complete the application online or call 855-347-8371. (You cannot complete the application at the TSA fingerprint site.)  Click here to learn more about Endorsements and Restrictions. Note: Non-Domiciled CLP/CDL: Based on federal regulations issued by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA), the Colorado DMV has suspended the issuance and renewal of Non-Domiciled Commercial Driver’s Licenses (CDLs) and Commercial Learner’s Permits (CLPs) effective September 29, 2025, until further notice. Individuals Not Eligible for a CLP or CDL: Individuals such as asylum seekers, refugees, and Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) recipients are not eligible for a Colorado CDL pursuant to new regulations issued by the FMCSA, effective March 16, 2026.  
 Step 2: Obtain Your CLP
 Prepare: Study for the written knowledge test for your desired CDL class and any endorsements. Schedule a CDL Written Test: Book an appointment for the "CDL Written Test" at a state driver license office and successfully pass the test. Click here to schedule a “CDL Written Test” appointment. Bring: You must bring: Valid Colorado Driver License Proof of Lawful Presence  Valid, unexpired US Passport Certified state, county, or city birth certificate Consular Report of Birth Abroad Certificate of Citizenship Certificate of Naturalization Valid, full-term Permanent Resident Card (I-551) Social Security Number (can be verbally provided) Two (2) proofs of Physical Colorado Residency. Click here for more information on acceptable address documents for CLPs. Payment: Pay the applicable fees to purchase your CDL. Click here to find relevant fees. Important Information Commercial Learner Permits (CLP) are valid for one year and are not eligible for renewal. The results of the written CDL knowledge test(s) are only valid for one issuance of a CLP. Once your CLP is issued, if you need a CLP with a different class or endorsement, you will need to re-take all required exams. Please take care to apply for the CLP that you need. Click here to learn more about the types of CLPs. CLPs must be held for 14 calendar days before the CDL skills test can be taken at an approved third-party testing facility. Click here to find an approved third-party testing facility. The CDL Knowledge Test is available in English and Spanish. The Hazmat Knowledge Test is ONLY available in English. 
 Step 3: Complete Required Training and Skills Testing for Your CDL
 After the 14-calendar-day CLP holding period, you are eligible for the skills portion of the CDL process. Training: Complete the mandatory Entry-Level Driver Training (ELDT) at an approved CDL driver training school. Click here to learn more about ELDT. Visit the training provider registry here. Testing: After your 14-calendar-day CLP holding period, you are eligible to take the skills portion of the process. Click here for approved driving schools. NOTE: Commercial learner permits (CLP) are valid for one year and are not eligible for renewal. If you do not get your CDL before the expiration date, you must retake the commercial written tests in an office. 
 Step 4: Get Your CDL (Includes Out-of-State CDL Transfers)
 Once you have passed the skills test, finalize your license at a driver license office. This applies to out-of-state transfers. Appointment: Schedule an appointment to visit a driver license office.  Select the “First Time Appointment” option. Click here to make an appointment. Required Items: Bring your valid CLP (or valid out-of-state CDL).  Out-of-State Transfer:  If you are transferring from another state, you will also need to provide proof of lawful presence and your physical Colorado address.  Acceptable proof of lawful presence documents include: Valid, unexpired US Passport Certified state, county, or city birth certificate Consular Report of Birth Abroad Certificate of Citizenship Certificate of Naturalization Valid, full-term Permanent Resident Card (I-551) Social Security Number: Can be provided verbally Required Address Documents: Click here for more information on acceptable proof of address documents. Name Check: The name on your CLP or CDL must match the name on your lawful presence documentation. Click here to learn more about name change documentation . DOT Medical Card: You must have a DOT Medical Card on file.  All DOT medical information is submitted directly to FMCSA’s National Registry by the medical provider. The State of Colorado will receive that information electronically from the Registry. This is the only allowable method of receiving Certified Medical Examiner Certificates. Click here to find an FMCSA Certified Medical Examiner in your area. Click here to learn more about CDL DOT medical. Proof of Education/Testing Completion Proof of successful Entry-Level Driving Training (ELDT) completion. Skills test completion form. Verified in the system. Driving History: A Ten-Year Driving History form (Form DR 2172) must be completed. Located on the Forms page here. Payment: Pay the applicable fees to purchase your CDL. Click here to find relevant fees. Note:  CDLs are valid for 4 years from the date of issuance. Non-Domiciled CLP/CDL: Based on federal regulations issued by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA), the Colorado DMV has suspended the issuance and renewal of Non-Domiciled Commercial Driver’s Licenses (CDLs) and Commercial Learner’s Permits (CLPs) until further notice. Individuals Not Eligible for a CLP or CDL: Individuals such as asylum seekers, refugees, and Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) recipients are not eligible for a Colorado CDL pursuant to new regulations issued by the FMCSA.  
 Endorsements
 Looking to add an endorsement to your CDL? Click here to learn about all CDL endorsements . 
 Renewals 
 Who Can Renew?
 Colorado Commercial Driver License (CDLs): If expired less than one year and a valid DOT medical card is on file. Hazmat Endorsement: To renew, you are required to have a valid TSA hazmat clearance on file and a written Hazmat test taken at a driver license office (appointment required).  Click here to learn more about endorsements and restrictions. Exception: Commercial learner permits (CLPs) are not eligible for renewal. You must retake the commercial written tests in an office. 
 How to Renew?
 Online:  You can generally renew your CDL online with myDMV if: Have a photo on file that is less than 10 years old. Have a CDL that has not expired for more than one year. Have  a valid DOT medical card on file with the DMV Have no active or pending restriction actions on your license. Have no change in your name or vision. Have no special medical restrictions. Click here to renew your CDL online. In Person:  If you are NOT changing anything on your CDL, all you need is your previous license, permit, or ID. If you do NOT have your previous CDL, you will need to bring an alternate form of identification. Acceptable  alternate forms of identification include: Colorado driver license/instruction permit/ID card (Unexpired/expired less than 10 years) Valid, unexpired US Passport Certified state, county, or city birth certificate Consular Report of Birth Abroad Certificate of Citizenship/Naturalization Valid, full-term Permanent Resident Card (I-551) Military ID/Common Access Card (Unexpired/expired less than 10 years) VA card (Issued within 20 years) Bureau of Indian Affairs or Tribal ID with photo (Issued within 20 years) 
 Important Information for Renewals
 Validity: CDLs are valid for 4 years from the date of issuance. DOT Medical Card: You must have a valid DOT medical card on file.  All DOT medical information is submitted directly to FMCSA’s National Registry “Registry”  by the medical provider. The State of Colorado will receive the information electronically from the registry. This is the only allowable method of receiving Certified Medical Examiner Certificates. The medical provider will submit the information to the Registry within 24 business hours of the medical exam. If you have recently seen a provider, please wait 24-48 business hours, then you can confirm the information is posted on myDMV or by calling our customer service call center at 303-205-5613.  Click here to learn more about CDL DOT Medical requirements. Hazmat Endorsement Renewal: Requires a valid TSA hazmat clearance on file and a written hazmat test taken at a driver license office. Appointments are required to take the written hazmat test.  Commercial Learner Permits (CLPs): CLPs are not eligible for renewal. You must retake the commercial written tests in an office. 
 Vets-2-Trucks Program 
 The Vets-2-Trucks program helps Colorado residents who are currently serving in the military, close to being discharged, or have been recently discharged (within one year) qualify for a Colorado CDL. The Vets-2-Trucks program waives the driving skills testing requirement, but still requires applicants to successfully pass the written exams. Forms Application for Military CDL Skills Test Waiver Form DR 2742 10-year license certification Form DR 2172 Solicitud de exención para militares de prueba de habilidades CDL Form DR 2742SP Click here to visit the Forms library.  
 Frequently Asked Questions 
 What Are Commercial Learner's Permits or CLPs?
 Commercial Learner Permits (CLP) are one of the first steps towards a Commercial Driver License (CDL).  CLPs are valid for one year after issuance and are not eligible for renewal. Once your CLP is issued, if you need a CLP with a different class or endorsement, you will need to re-take all required exams. Please take care to apply for the CLP that you need.  Learn more about CLP types here. Note: The results of the written CDL knowledge test(s) are only valid for one issuance of a CLP.  CLPs must be held for 14 calendar days before the CDL skills test can be taken at an approved third-party testing facility. Find approved third-party testers here. 
 My CDL Was Revoked/Suspended. How do I Get it Back?
 Revocation: you may be required to take both the regular and CDL written exams and drive skills tests after you reinstate. Suspension: your CDL should go back to valid after you reinstate, or you may purchase a duplicate CDL. Important: If your CDL expired (for less than one year) during the suspension, you will be required to renew it or downgrade to a regular license. If your CDL was canceled due to an unpaid ticket, you are required to purchase a new CDL. If your CDL was canceled for more than one year, you are required to take the CDL general knowledge test, any relevant endorsement knowledge tests based on your desired CDL type, and the CDL drive skills test. If your CDL was canceled due to an expired DOT medical, the license will go back to valid after the Department of Revenue receives your current DOT medical information. Click here to learn more about DOT Medical. If your CDL expired (for less than 1 year) before you provided your current DOT medical, you will be required to renew it or downgrade to a regular license.  Click here to learn more about DOT Medical. 
 What Are the CLP/CDL Required Identity and Lawful Presence Documents?
 To be issued a Colorado Commercial Learner’s Permit (CLP), you will need your valid Colorado driver license, social security number, TWO proofs of your Colorado physical residential address, and federally approved proof of your lawful presence. If you are transferring your out-of-state Commercial Driver License (CDL), you will need your valid out-of-state CDL, your social security number, two proofs of your Colorado physical residential address, and federally approved proof of your lawful presence. REAL IDs do NOT count as proof of lawful presence for CLPs and CDLs. Make sure you bring the correct proof of lawful presence documents to receive your first CLP or CDL in Colorado.  Acceptable proof of lawful presence documents include: Valid, unexpired US Passport Certified state, county, or city birth certificate Consular Report of Birth Abroad Certificate of Citizenship Certificate of Naturalization Valid, full-term Permanent Resident Card (I-551) Click here for a detailed list of acceptable address documents. 
 How do I Transfer a CDL From Another State?
 All valid (expired less than one year) out-of-state CDLs will transfer to Colorado with appropriate lawful presence documents. The written and skills test requirements are waived for customers surrendering a valid out-of-state CDL for a Colorado CDL based on their current out-of-state CDL. All endorsements, with the exception of the H and X, will also transfer. Out-of-state CDL permits do not transfer and require retesting.  You must bring your valid (expired less than one year) out-of-state CDL, the required lawful presence documents ( see the DR 2300D form in our Forms Library here ), and two proofs of your Colorado physical address. You must bring or be able to provide your SSN. If the name on your documents and credential do not match, you will also need to bring documents to connect any name changes.  Click here for information on documents to connect name changes. Click here for information on proof of Colorado address documents. 
 Who is Not Eligible for a CDL?
 Individuals such as asylum seekers, refugees, and Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) recipients are not eligible for a Colorado CDL pursuant to new regulations issued by the FMCSA.  Additionally, Colorado does currently issue CLPs or CDLs to Temporarily Lawfully Present (Non-Domiciled) individuals. This is based on new federal regulations issued by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA). The Colorado DMV has suspended the issuance and renewals of Non-Domiciled Commercial Driver Licenses (CDLs) and Commercial Learner Permits (CLPs) until further notice.  
 What Are the Classes of Commercial Driver Licenses?
 Class A - combination vehicles - consists of any combination of vehicles with a Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR) of 26,001 pounds or more, provided the GVWR of the vehicle(s) being towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds. Class B - straight trucks and light combinations - consists of any single vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 pounds or more, or any such vehicle towing a vehicle which does not have a GVWR in excess of 10,000 pounds. Class C - single vehicles less than 26,001 GVWR - consists of any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that do not meet the definition of a Class A or B commercial vehicle, but that transports 16 or more passengers (including the driver) OR is placarded for transportation of hazardous materials. 
 Can I Get a Non-Domiciled CDL as a Temporarily Lawfully Present Resident?
 No, Colorado currently does not issue CLPs or CDLs to Temporarily Lawfully Present (Non-Domiciled) individuals. This is based on new federal regulations issued by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA).  The Colorado DMV has suspended the issuance and renewal of Non-Domiciled CDLs and CLPs until further notice.  
 Can I Get a CDL if I am an Asylee, Refugee, or DACA Recipient?
 No, current federal regulations specifically exclude asylum seekers, refugees, and Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) recipients from being issued a CDL. 
 How do I Check My Hazmat Status?
 Click here to check your hazmat status online or call 855-347-8371.  For those who wish to appeal TSA's decision or apply for a waiver, please call 855-347-8371 for more information. 
 How do I Find an Approved Third Party CDL Tester?
 Click here for a list of approved third party CDL testers. 
 How do I Contact the CDL Unit?
 Driver License Office Attn: CDL Unit 3265 S Wadsworth Blvd.  Lakewood, CO 80214 For general questions, call 303-205-5600 or email dor_cdlunit@state.co.us . 
 Additional Resources 
 CDL Endorsements and Restrictions CDL DOT Medical Additional Information Request Form Commercial Driver License Manual Commercial Vehicle School List Third-Party Testers Map Commercial Driver Voices of Safety Driver Education 
 DMV Resources Helpful Links About Us Accessibility Statement for CDOR ADA Digital Services Request A-Z Directory Difference Between State & County Offices DMV Careers Request a Retest for Driver License Colorado Department of Revenue Home CDOR Open Data Use Terms CDOR Privacy Notice 
 Contact Us Contact a DMV Section Driver License Office Locations County Motor Vehicle Office Locations DMV Newsroom Ask for Help Discrimination Complaint Procedure 
 Chat with DMV 
 placeholder 
 © 2026 State of Colorado 
 Transparency Online 
 General Notices 
 Colorado Official State Web Portal 
