Most operators of Commercial Motor Vehicles (CMV) must have a Commercial Driver's License (CDL).
Some individuals are not required to hold a CDL to operate a CMV. This exception applies to certain military
personnel, farmers, firefighters, emergency response vehicle operators and individuals removing snow and ice.
For exception details and requirements review 49 CFR 383.3.

If you perform trade, traffic, or transport exclusively within your business' home state, this is considered
intrastate commerce. If your trade, traffic, or transport is between a place in a state and a place outside of such
state (including a place outside of the United States); between two places in a state through another state or
a place outside of the United States; or between two places in a state as part of trade, traffic or transportation
originating or terminating outside the state or the United States, this is considered interstate commerce.

To obtain a CLP (Commercial Learner's Permit) or CDL, the applicant must:
·Have a valid Medical Examination Certificate (MEC) on file with the BMV that was submitted

       electronically by the certified medical examiner.
· Pass applicable vision and knowledge test(s)
· Obtain a commercial driver's license learner's permit (CLP)
·Complete Entry-Level Driver Training with a Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration's Training Provider
·Watch an instructional video on how to recognize, prevent, and report human trafficking, and pass a CDL

       skills test at a BMV-approved CDL Skills Test Site.
This manual is a study guide for applicant requirements, passing knowledge tests and the CDL skills test.

The Commercial Driver License manual may be obtained online at IN.gov/BMV or at any Indiana Bureau of
Motor Vehicles (BMV) branch.

Classes of Commercial Motor Vehicles

Applicants must determine which CDL class for which they are making application. For information on
commercial motor vehicle classes, review the following: Section 1 Introduction.

CDL Endorsements

CDL endorsement codes and descriptions are listed below:

Endorsement Code  Description
T                 Double/Triple Trailers
P                 Passenger Transport
N                 Tank Vehicle
H                 Hazardous Material
X                 Combination of tank vehicle and hazardous materials endorsement
S                 School Bus

To obtain the hazardous materials endorsement for a CDL, you must have Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) security threat assessment approval for the term of the CDL. Hazardous materials
endorsement will not be added to a CLP.

For additional information and testing requirements for CDL endorsements please review the following:
   · 1.1.1 ­ Knowledge Tests
   · 1.1.2 ­ Skills Test

                  Indiana Specific Commercial Driver's License Applicant Information
                                                  SP 283 (R-5 7/26)

                                                              2
CDL Restrictions

CDL restriction codes and the descriptions are listed below:

Restriction Code Description    Reason

E  No Manual Transmission       Applicant takes the CDL skills test in a vehicle that has

   Equipped CMV (Printed        an automatic transmission. (To remove this restriction

   description on credential    applicant must pass a skills test in a CMV with manual

   "Auto Transmission CMV") transmission of the same class of vehicle or higher.)

K  CDL Intrastate Only          Applicant is restricted to operating in Intrastate Commerce.

L  No Air Brake Equipped CMV Applicant does not pass the Air Brakes knowledge test or

                                the CDL skills test in a vehicle with a full air brake system.

M  No Class A Passenger         Applicant takes a CDL skills test in a Class B passenger

   Vehicle                      vehicle and holds a Class A CDL

N  No Class A or B Passenger Applicant takes a CDL skills test in a Class C passenger

   Vehicle                      vehicle and holds a Class A CDL

O  No Tractor-trailer CMV       Applicant takes the CDL skills test in a Class A vehicle that

                                is not a tractor-trailer CMV.

P  No Passengers in CMV         Applicants cannot transport passengers in a CMV bus

   Vehicle                      while holding a CLP with a passenger or school bus

                                endorsement.

Q  Bus Only                     Applicant received the CDL with passenger endorsement
                                without completing the General Knowledge test. (This
                                restriction is no longer available. To remove the restriction
                                the applicant must pass the General Knowledge test.)

R  Valid for Restricted         Applicant has a Restricted CDL B for Agricultural Purposes

   Agricultural CDL Privileges

   Only when presented

   with Seasonal Validation

   Document

V  Medical Variance             Applicant has an FMCSA approved Medical Exemption.

X  No Cargo in CMV Tank         Applicant cannot transport cargo in a tank vehicle while

   Vehicle                      holding a CLP with a tank endorsement.

Z  No Full Air Brake Equipped Applicant takes the test in a vehicle with an air over

   CMV                          hydraulic brake system.

Commercial Learner's Permit (CLP)

Below are the requirements for an applicant to obtain a CLP:
    · Pay all required fees.

    · Must be at least 18 years of age. (To operate in interstate commerce and/or apply for a school bus,
         applicant must be at least 21 years of age.)

    · Must have an unexpired Indiana license and valid driving privileges and must not be subject to any
         disqualification under 49 CFR § 383.51. Provide a valid Medical Examiner's Certificate.

    · Be a U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident. Lawful permanent residents must provide a valid,

   Indiana Specific Commercial Driver's License Applicant Information
                                   SP 283 (R-5 7/26)

                                               3
         unexpired Permanent Resident Card, issued by USCIS or INS. (See Non-Domiciled CLP/CDL
         information if you are not a U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident.)
    · Must provide proof the applicant is domiciled in Indiana, as defined in 49 CFR § 383.5.
    · Provide the names of all states where previously licensed to operate any type of motor vehicle during
         the previous 10 years.
    · Pass one or more of the following knowledge test(s):
       a. General knowledge test for all applicants.
       b. Passenger transport knowledge test by all bus operators.
       c. Air brakes knowledge test for operation of a CMV with air brakes.
       d. Combination vehicle knowledge test for combination vehicles.
       e. The tanker knowledge test for applicants required to haul liquids in bulk.
       f. The doubles/triples knowledge test to pull double or triple trailers.
       g. The school bus knowledge test by all school bus operators. (The passenger endorsement is also

            required for the school bus endorsement.) Only passenger endorsement is required for drivers
            delivering school buses not transporting pre-primary, primary or secondary school students from
            home to school, from school to home, or to and from school-sponsored events.
For issuance of a Class C CDL, the applicant must complete the testing requirements for the endorsement(s)
passenger or school bus. Applicants wishing to obtain the Class C CDL with the hazardous materials
endorsement will be required to apply for the Class B CLP to complete the CDL Skills Test in the Class C CMV.

After an applicant has acquired the CLP, the applicant must pass a CDL skills test in a vehicle representative of
the class of CDL for which the applicant is applying. The CDL skills test must be taken at a BMV-approved CDL
skills test site. A list of BMV-approved CDL skills test sites may be obtained by visiting www.myBMV.com or a
BMV branch. Prior to obtaining the CDL, the applicant must complete Entry-Level Driver Training (ELDT) and
watch an instructional video on how to recognize, prevent and report human trafficking.

A CLP is valid for one year.

Non-Domiciled CLP/CDL

To qualify for anon-domiciledCLP/CDLyoumustprovidethe followingLawful Status documents:
    · Valid foreign passport(excluding Canada and Mexico)
    · Valid I-94with one of the followingclass of admissions codes:
         H-2A - Temporary Agricultural Workers;
         H-2B - Temporary Non-agriculturalWorkers;or
         E-2 - Treaty Investors.

All other requirements are listed below:
    · Havedocumentationrequiredfor Real ID;
    · Have a valid United States Social Security number;
    · Have a validMedical Examiner's Certificate (MEC)on file with the BMV;
    · Obtain a commercial learner's permit;
    · Pass a skills test inavehicle class you intend tooperate;and
    · Watch an instructional video on how to recognize, prevent, and report human trafficking.

                             Indiana Specific Commercial Driver's License Applicant Information
                                                              SP 283 (R-5 7/26)

                                                                         4
A CDL skills exam must be taken at one of the authorizedCDL driving skills3rdPartyCDL skills
testexamsites. There you willdemonstrateyour knowledge and skills ofoperatinga commercial motor
vehicle.

Anon-domiciled CLP/CDLholdermustpresenttheirIdentity and Lawful Status documentsin person,at a
branch,for allCLP/CDLtransactions processed.

CDL Knowledge Tests

If an applicant fails a CDL knowledge test, the applicant may take the test again the next business day. An
applicant can only attempt a CDL knowledge test once a day. Once the CDL knowledge test has been passed
the CDL test results are valid for one year.

How to Transfer an Out-of-Country or Out-of-State CDL

To transfer an out-of-state CDL to an Indiana CDL the applicant must meet the following requirements:
    · Pay all required fees.
    · Be at least 18 years of age. (To operate interstate commerce and/or apply for a school bus, applicant
         must be at least 21 years of age.)
    · Present documents of identification proving the applicant's identity, Social Security number, lawful
         status, and Indiana residency. A list of acceptable documents may be obtained on IN.gov/BMV or at any
         BMV branch.
    · Be a U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident. Lawful permanent residents must provide a valid,
         unexpired Permanent Resident Card, issued by USCIS or INS. (See Non-Domiciled CLP/CDL
         information if you are not a U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident.)
    · Have proof of an unexpired CDL and valid driving privileges.
    · Pass the general knowledge test.
    · Pass the hazardous materials knowledge test, if applicable.
    · Medical Examiner's Certificate on file with the BMV.
    · Provide the names of all states where previously licensed to operate any type of motor vehicle during
         the previous ten years.
    · Surrender the CDL from the previous state of residency to the BMV.

Out-of-state CDL refers to a CDL from any of the 50 U.S states including the District of Columbia, Canada and
Mexico, but NOT United States territories Guam, Puerto Rico, American Samoa and the Virgin Islands. Any
CDL that is not considered Out-of-State must retest for the CDL and apply for issuance of a CLP.

The CDL is an endorsement to an individual's driver's license. An applicant may be required to meet additional
requirements for their license type.

Individuals have 30 days to transfer an out-of-state CDL.

The driver's license knowledge exam is only required if the out-of-state CDL is expired.

Medical Examiner Requirements and Medical Examiner's Certification (MEC)

All medical examinations must be completed by a medical examiner certified by the Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration (FMCSA). You may locate a certified medical examiner by viewing the FMCSA National
Registry of Certified Medical Examiners at https://nationalregistry.fmcsa.dot.gov.

CLP/CDL applicants and holders are required to:

                             Indiana Specific Commercial Driver's License Applicant Information
                                                              SP 283 (R-5 7/26)

                                                                         5
